The nurse at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas who tested positive for Ebola has received a blood donation from a North Texas doctor who survived his bout with the potentially deadly disease.
Nina Pham, 26, is believed to be the first person to contract Ebola within the United States.
A spokesperson for Samaritan's Purse said Dr. Kent Brantly, the Fort Worth physician who survived Ebola after he was treated at Emory University Medical Center in Atlanta earlier this summer, donated blood to Pham on Sunday.
Brantly, who previously said he offered to donate blood to first Dallas Ebola patient Thomas Eric Duncan but was not a compatible blood type, went to Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital to make a plasma donation.
Brantly didn't have to go far to make the blood donation for Pham. He recently moved back to North Texas after recovering from Ebola in Atlanta.
Nina Pham in Photos Nina Pham in Photos
Pham tested positive for Ebola in tests from the Texas Department of State Health Services, and the diagnosis was confirmed in a test conducted by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.
Pham is a 2010 graduate of Texas Christian University's nursing program and, according to NBC News, passed her Texas Board of Nursing registration exam the same year. On Aug. 1 of this year, Pham received her certificate in critical care nursing — less that two months before she would be part of the team treating Duncan.
A critical care nurse deals specifically with "life-threatening problems," and patients who are "vulnerable, unstable and complex, thereby requiring intense and vigilant nursing care," according to the website of the American Association of Critical Care Nurses, the body that certified Pham, NBC News reported.
CDC: "Clear Breach of Protocol" on 2nd Ebola CaseCDC: &quot;Clear Breach of Protocol&quot; on 2nd Ebola CaseDr. Tom Frieden, head of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, along with Dr. David Lakey, commissioner of the Texas Department of State Health Service, held a briefing Sunday morning on the second Ebola patient diagnosed in Dallas. (Published Sunday, Oct 12, 2014)
Before college, Pham went to Nolan Catholic High School in Fort Worth and graduated in 2006.
"She was such a good science student," said Gaye Houk, one of Pham's high school teachers. "She was kind of one of our leaders in the science department. We had a lot from that group that went on to be nurses."
A family friend said Pham's family is very involved in the Catholic Church.
"Like her family, she is a very devoted individual," said Thomas Ha. "She will serve you first, before she takes care of herself."
Ha said Pham is dedicated to her profession.
"Instead of taking care of that patient as much as the medical ethics requires, she goes beyond that," said Ha. "She wants to save people."
Pham lives in Dallas, and her apartment on the 3700 block of Marquita Avenue was thoroughly cleaned and desanitized by a hazmat crew. Phase two of that cleaning began Monday afternoon, according to the City of Dallas. In the meantime, officials moved Pham's dog, Bentley, a spaniel breed, to a temporary location where it can be cared for and monitored for Ebola.
TCU Communications Director Lisa Albert said in a statement that they have no reason to suspect Pham had visited the Fort Worth campus while infected, while asking that they keep the alum in their thoughts and prayers.
Ebola Fight: Health Care Workers Face Risk
Federal and local health officials are trying to identify how Pham became infected with Ebola while following Centers for Disease Control and Prevention safety protocols, which include wearing a gloves, a mask, a gown and a shield.
While it's still not clear how she became exposed, she has been working with CDC investigators to make sure no one else ends up in isolation.
CDC Director Dr. Tom Frieden said Sunday that a "breach in protocol" led to the infection, though officials have not yet identified the source of the lapse. After some interpreted his statement as finding fault with either the nurse or hospital, Frieden clarified his statement on Monday.
"I spoke about a 'breach in protocol' and that's what we speak about in public health when we're talking about what needs to happen and our focus is to say, would this protocol have prevented the infection? And we believe it would have," Frieden said. "But, some interpreted that as finding fault with the hospital or the health care worker. And, I'm sorry if that was the impression given. That was certainly not my intention. People on the front lines are really protecting all of us. People on the front lines are fighting Ebola."
Cleanup Begins at Second Ebola Patient's Home
The state health department said Pham reported a low-grade fever Friday night and was moved to a 24-bed Intensive Care Unit at the hospital being used as an isolation unit. The preliminary test result confirming Ebola was received late Saturday in a process that took less than 90 minutes.
Texas Health Presbyterian in Dallas said a close contact of Pham's has already proactively been put into isolation at the hospital. The car Pham drove to the hospital has been decontaminated and secured. Dallas Mayor Mike Rawlings said everything the patient touched has been decontaminated to ensure everyone's safety.
News of Ebola Diagnosis Hits Dallas' M StreetsNews of Ebola Diagnosis Hits Dallas' M StreetsPeople who live in the neighborhood where second Dallas Ebola patient Nina Pham lives, known as the M Streets, are reacting to news of her diagnosis. (Published Monday, Oct 13, 2014)
"The enemy here is a virus. Ebola. It's not a person. It's not a country. It's not a place. It's not a hospital. It's a virus. It's a virus that's tough to fight. But together, I'm confident that we will stop it. What we need to do is all take responsibility for improving the safety of those on the front lines," Frieden said in a statement Monday. "I feel awful that a health care worker became infected in the care of an Ebola patient. She was there trying to help the first patient survive and now she has become infected. All of us have to work together to do whatever is possible to reduce the risk that any other health care worker becomes infected."
Dallas City Leaders, Health Officials Discuss Second Ebola PatientDallas City Leaders, Health Officials Discuss Second Ebola PatientDallas County Judge Clay Jenkins, Mayor Mike Rawlings and Dr. Daniel Varga held a news conference Sunday morning to inform the public that a health care worker at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas test positive for the Ebola virus after coming in close contact with Ebola patient Thomas Eric Duncan. (Published Sunday, Oct 12, 2014)
Ebola is spread through direct contact with bodily fluids of a sick person or exposure to contaminated objects such as needles. People are not contagious before symptoms, such as fever, develop.

DALLAS — A 29-year-old nurse who is the second Texas hospital worker to test positive for Ebola is "ill but clinically stable" and was transferred late Wednesday to Emory University Hospital in Atlanta, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said.

Emory University Hospital 's Infectious Disease Unit is where the first two U.S. Ebola patients — both health missionary workers stationed in Liberia — were treated and released in August. Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital, where the nurses work, has only three isolation units.

The announcement came only hours after the CDC confirmed that the nurse, identified by family members as Amber Vinson, had flown on a Frontier Airlines flight from Cleveland to Dallas.

CDC director Thomas Frieden said she had violated CDC guidelines against anyone using public transport while undergoing self-monitoring for exposure to Ebola. Frieden said Vinson did not report that her temperature had risen a small amount, to 99.5 degrees, before she departed for Dallas. He said her risk to other passengers was "very low."

But a CDC spokesman said Wednesday night that Vinson had spoken with the agency and was cleared to fly from Cleveland to Detroit by the CDC official responsible for monitoring her health.

CDC spokesman David Daigle said Vinson spoke with the official and reported her temperature was below 100.4 degrees and had no symptoms, and the official said she could board the flight.

"We will from this moment forward ensure that no other individual who is being monitored for exposure undergoes travel in any way other than controlled movement," Frieden said.

The nurse arrived in Atlanta by special aircraft Wednesday night. Footage aired by WXIA-TV showed her walking with assistance from the plane and to a waiting ambulance while wearing protective clothing.

The CDC also asked the 132 passengers on Frontier Airlines Flight 1143 on Oct. 13 from Cleveland to Dallas/Fort Worth to call the CDC at 1-800-CDC INFO (1-800-232-4636).

Frontier Airlines said in a statement that the passenger "exhibited no symptoms or sign of illness" while on the flight and that the plane had since been thoroughly cleaned.

Also Wednesday, Kent State University said the second nurse, Vinson, was related to three university employees and that they were asking the workers to stay off campus for 21 days "out of an abundance of caution."

The federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said the additional infection is "a serious concern."

"What happened there (in Dallas), regardless of the reason, is not acceptable. It shouldn't have happened," Anthony Fauci, director of the Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases of NIH, said Wednesday on MSNBC.

Vinson was among more than 70 workers at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital who helped care for Ebola patient Thomas Duncan, a Liberian national who died of the virus.

The CDC said Wednesday that Vinson and the first nurse to contract the disease, Nina Pham, 26, had been in the room with Duncan during his most intense period of vomiting and diarrhea, but before he had been diagnosed as having Ebola.

Ebola, which has killed more than 4,000 people in West Africa, is transmitted through bodily fluids. Duncan apparently contracted the virus while helping neighbors transport a young Ebola patient to the hospital.

New cases of Ebola in West Africa could reach 10,000 per week by December as the virus outbreak races out of control there, World Health Organization officials said this week.

At a morning news conference, Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins said he could not rule out more cases among 75 other hospital staffers who cared for Duncan and were being monitored by the CDC.

"We are preparing contingencies for more and that is a real possibility," Jenkins said

Dallas authorities moved quickly to try to contain any spread of the disease from the latest case.

Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas.
Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas.(Photo: AP)
Dallas Mayor Mike Rawlings, who rushed to the health worker's apartment early Wednesday, said a contamination team quickly treated common areas around the apartment and were preparing to enter the woman's unit.

The mayor, who went door to door at the apartment to advise other residents of the situation, said that it was the city's goal to provide as much information as possible and "to deal with facts not fear."

He also sought to allay concerns over the latest case, which he conceded had ratcheted up anxiety in the city.

"It may get worse before it gets better, but it will get better," Rawlings said.

He said local officials in Dallas asked for the latest patient to be transferred to Atlanta.

"This allows the hospital to be focused on the employees that came in contact with Mr. Duncan," Rawlings said. "The state thought that was a good idea, and the CDC made that call."

Rawlings said he was disappointed to learn that Vinson was never instructed to avoid air travel when she was directed by hospital staff to self-monitor for signs of Ebola. He said he was also upset that two nurses who cared for Mr. Duncan have tested positive for Ebola, while none of the 48 people throughout the city who interacted with him have shown any signs of the virus.

"This was a two-front battle we were fighting: one was outside on the street and the other was in the hospital," Rawlings said. "I thought the easier battle would be within the hospital itself. Obviously, we didn't succeed in that."

Ebola cases could dramatically increase
The first nurse to contract the disease, Nina Pham, said Tuesday that she is "doing well" and thanked the medical staff at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital for her care. Jenkins said Wednesday that her condition had been upgraded to "good."

None of the original 48 people who had contact with Duncan prior to hospitalization have shown signs of the virus, Jenkins said.

While health officials have not determined how the two nurses became infected with Ebola, a nurses' union slammed the hospital for its handling of the Duncan case.

According to a statement released late Tuesday by the largest U.S. nurses' union, Duncan was left in an open area of a Dallas emergency room for hours, and the nurses treating him worked for days without proper protective gear and faced constantly changing protocols,

Wendell Watson, a Presbyterian spokesman, did not respond to specific claims by the nurses but said the hospital has not received similar complaints.

"Patient and employee safety is our greatest priority and we take compliance very seriously," he said in a statement. "We have numerous measures in place to provide a safe working environment, including mandatory annual training and a 24/7 hotline and other mechanisms that allow for anonymous reporting."

The pool of potential contacts being monitored by CDC specialists in Dallas dropped from around 126 to 118 after some of the potential carriers of the Ebola virus were ruled out, said David Daigle, a CDC spokesman in Dallas.

Of those 118, 48 are expected to be released from the watch this weekend when they surpass their 21-day incubation period for the virus, he said. That number could dip or rise in the coming days, as more potential contacts are ruled out or investigators find others who have been in contact with the deceased original Ebola patient or the two nurses hospitalized for signs of the virus.

"We really hope it doesn't grow," he said. "But it may well."

CDC specialists are still reviewing all the steps taken by hospital staff to determine where, if any, a breach in protocol may have occurred, Daigle said.

We're just now starting to take a hard look at infection control," Daigle said.

DALLAS—Political leaders warned Wednesday that there could be more cases of Ebola here in coming days, as this city continues to feel the consequences of a local hospital’s problem-plagued effort to treat the first case of the disease diagnosed in the U.S.

The Texas Department of State Health Services said Wednesday that a second health-care worker had contracted the disease from Thomas Eric Duncan, a Liberian man found to have Ebola at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas on Sept. 30. The nurse, Amber Joy Vinson, was among those who treated Mr. Duncan before he died Oct. 8.

At a news conference Wednesday morning, Dallas leaders sought to play down public fears about the spread of Ebola in the nation’s ninth-largest city, noting that all transmissions of the disease so far have been limited to health-care workers at the one hospital. But they acknowledged that more cases were now likely.

“It may get worse before it gets better, but it will get better,” Mayor Mike Rawlings said.

Another nurse who treated Mr. Duncan, Nina Pham, 26 years old, was also infected while caring for Mr. Duncan and is now being treated at the hospital, which said Wednesday that she was in good condition. Health officials and the hospital haven’t determined how she became infected, and have said she was wearing a mask, gown, shield and gloves when treating Mr. Duncan.

But the second case reinforced concerns about the safeguards the hospital had used to shield workers from potential infection as it treated a late-stage Ebola patient in an isolation ward, uncharted territory for a general American hospital. Seventy-five additional health-care workers who helped treat Mr. Duncan are now actively being monitored for potential Ebola symptoms.

A federal health-care agency said Wednesday it was reviewing allegations raised by a nurses union that the Dallas hospital mishandled Mr. Duncan’s case, putting patients and health-care workers at risk.

David Wright, deputy regional administrator for the U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services in Dallas, said it was “closely evaluating and reviewing” the allegations made by National Nurses United on behalf of what it said were an unnamed number of nurses at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas.

The union, which doesn’t represent nurses at the hospital, released a statement Tuesday evening it said was made by the group of nurses, which described an atmosphere of chaos and changing safety guidelines among hospital staff as they treated Mr. Duncan.

The statement said Mr. Duncan was initially left for several hours in an area where other patients were present when he was first admitted to the hospital, even though he was a suspected Ebola case. Nurses also claimed that some nurses had to interact with him with insufficient protective gear, during a period when he had “copious amounts of diarrhea and vomiting,” and that hospital officials allowed nurses who treated Mr. Duncan to subsequently tend to other patients, the statement said.

“There was no event preparedness on what to do with the patient. There was no protocol. There was no system,” said Deborah Burger, co-president of National Nurses United. “The nurses were asked to call the infectious disease department. The infectious disease department did not have clear policies to provide either.”

Daniel Varga, chief clinical officer for the hospital’s parent company, Texas Health Resources, said in a news conference Wednesday morning that he couldn’t discuss the various claims made about what occurred during Mr. Duncan’s treatment. But he acknowledged that “it is clear that there was an exposure, sometime, somewhere.”

By dawn Wednesday, in a scene now familiar to Dallas citizens, police and other officials were walking the neighborhood of the latest health-care worker to contract Ebola, preparing to decontaminate her apartment and letting neighbors know that someone living near them had tested positive for the virus.

Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins, the county’s top elected official, pleaded Wednesday for people to support the hospital’s health-care workers, who are now anxious about the possibility that they too will contract Ebola.

“Like Nina Pham, this is a heroic person,” Judge Jenkins said of Ms. Vinson, adding, “I hope this community will rally around the human beings that are suffering.”

DALLAS — The director of the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said on Tuesday that the agency planned a more robust response to any future Ebola cases in American hospitals, saying for the first time that quicker and more concerted action on its part might have kept a Dallas nurse from becoming infected by the virus.

The acknowledgment came on a day when a nurses’ union released a scathing statement that it said was composed by nurses at the Dallas hospital where the nurse, Nina Pham, 26, contracted Ebola. The statement told of “confusion and frequently changing policies and protocols,” inadequate protection against contamination and spotty training.

“Were the protocols breached?” asked Deborah Burger, a co-president of the union, National Nurses United, reading the statement. “The nurses say there were no protocols.”

Officials at the hospital, Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital, defended their efforts to “provide a safe working environment,” but said they would review any concerns raised by nurses.

Nina Pham is being treated at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital, where she works. Credit Jennifer Joseph
C.D.C. officials, responding earlier to the broader criticisms about their handling of the Ebola cases in Dallas, pledged to dispatch within hours a newly created response team to any hospital that had a confirmed case of Ebola, and they increased the amount of expertise, oversight and training at the hospital where the nurse treating Thomas Eric Duncan, 42, who had Ebola, became infected.

They have sent some of the world’s leading experts on Ebola to Dallas, as well as two nurses from Emory University Hospital in Atlanta who cared for Ebola patients safely and who will train hospital staff members on infection control and the use of protective gear.

“I wish we had put a team like this on the ground the day the patient, the first patient, was diagnosed,” Dr. Thomas R. Frieden, director of the C.D.C., said at a news conference Tuesday. “That might have prevented this infection. But we will do that from today onward with any case, anywhere in the U.S.”

He added, “We could have sent a more robust hospital infection-control team and been more hands-on with the hospital from Day 1.”

Officials said they were now monitoring daily 76 health care workers at Presbyterian Hospital who treated or cleaned up after Mr. Duncan or might have handled blood specimens from the time he was admitted to the hospital on Sept. 28 to his death last Wednesday. “There were 76 people who had some level of contact and therefore are being actively monitored,” Dr. Frieden said.

An additional 48 people were already being watched because they had possible contact with Mr. Duncan before he was hospitalized. One contact of Ms. Pham was also being monitored. The total under observation is now 125.

Mr. Duncan, a Liberian who arrived in America last month, was initially sent home from the hospital although he had a fever and reported coming from Africa. His case was diagnosed on Sept. 30, two days after he was admitted and put in isolation. At some point, Ms. Pham contracted Ebola after having extensive interactions with him. The hospital said she was in “good condition,” and for the first time on Tuesday, Ms. Pham made a public statement, as the hospital said the costs of her care would be covered and would not be a financial burden on her or her family.

“I’m doing well and want to thank everyone for their kind wishes and prayers,” she said.

At the same time, Dr. Frieden said that the 48 people whom officials started monitoring two weeks ago had passed a critical period and were now unlikely to contract the disease. They were more than 14 days into the 21-day maximum incubation period.

One of them is Mr. Duncan’s fiancée, Louise Troh, 54, who has been under state-ordered quarantine with her 13-year-old son and two other young men. “Right now, we’re O.K.,” she said in a phone interview from the house where she and the others have been staying, in an undisclosed location. “I’m healthy. Everybody’s fine. God is in control.”

The Rev. George Mason, Ms. Troh’s pastor at Wilshire Baptist Church, drove on Tuesday to pick up an application for a new apartment for Ms. Troh. He said she would be starting over with almost nothing as her old apartment was shut by officials and decontaminated.

“She lost everything,” Mr. Mason said. “It’s like she had a fire.”

Officials with the nurses’ union that issued the statement Tuesday night said it had been prepared by Presbyterian nurses who had knowledge of the care provided to Mr. Duncan and to Ms. Pham. They refused to identify the nurses or their departments, saying the Presbyterian nurses feared retaliation, and they refused to say whether any nurses who prepared the statement had been involved in treating Mr. Duncan. The Presbyterian nurses are not members of the National Nurses United union.

The statement asserted that when Mr. Duncan arrived by ambulance with Ebola symptoms at the hospital’s emergency room on Sept. 28, he “was left for several hours, not in isolation, in an area where other patients were present.” At some point, it said, a nurse supervisor demanded that he be moved to an isolation unit “but faced resistance from other hospital authorities.”

The nurses who first interacted with Mr. Duncan wore generic gowns, three pairs of gloves with no taping around the wrists, and surgical masks with the option of a shield, the statement said. “The gowns they were given still exposed their necks, the part closest to their face and mouth,” the nurses said. “They also left exposed the majority of their heads and their scrubs from the knees down. Initially they were not even given surgical bootees nor were they advised the number of pairs of gloves to wear.”

The statement said hospital officials allowed nurses who interacted with Mr. Duncan at a time when he was vomiting and had diarrhea to continue their normal duties, “taking care of other patients even though they had not had the proper personal protective equipment while providing care for Mr. Duncan that was later recommended by the C.D.C.”

Told of the statement, a spokeswoman for the C.D.C. said the agency would not be looking at the situation from a regulatory perspective. “That oversight comes from the health department at the state level,” the spokeswoman said.

Dr. Frieden said the agency’s Ebola response teams would be deployed anywhere in the country starting on Tuesday. “We will put a team on the ground within hours, with some of the world’s leading experts in how to take care of and protect health care workers from Ebola infection,” he said, adding it would include specialists in other fields.

It was unclear what, if any, monitoring the C.D.C. performed of the precautions hospital workers took as they went in and out of Mr. Duncan’s room. Officials said Ms. Pham had worn a gown, mask and other protective gear when she came into contact with Mr. Duncan, but they said she appeared to have breached safety protocol, possibly when removing the protections. The Texas health commissioner, David L. Lakey, said she was working with investigators to try to pinpoint when she may have been exposed.


