After Ferguson, what's next for Darren Wilson?

600 Comments   840 Shares   132 Tweets   Stumble   Email More +
Officer Darren Wilson will leave the Ferguson police department after less than three years of service with no severance package, pension or benefits. Ending nearly a week of negotiations, Wilson resigned citing threats against fellow officers as his motivation reports CBS News correspondent Vladimir Duthiers.

"They got some intelligence that suggested there were going to be some targets at the Ferguson Police Department and the minute he said that, he also indicated that he thought his resignation might alleviate some of those threats," one of Wilson's attorneys Neil Bruntrager said. "They had some intel that suggested there was going to be some action of a violent nature."

In his letter to officials, Wilson stated he would have liked to stay on the force "...but the safety of other police officers and the community are of paramount importance to me. It is my hope that my resignation will allow the community to heal."

 
20 PHOTOS
Demonstrations continue in Ferguson
But emotions in Ferguson are still raw following a grand jury's decision not to indict Wilson for the shooting death of unarmed black teenager Michael Brown. A small but vocal group continues to gather outside Ferguson's police department.

Prior to Sunday's football game in Saint Louis, five Rams players came on to the field with their arms raised, a show of support for the "hands up don't shoot" movement.

The gesture drew a strong reaction from the Saint Louis police Officers Association. In a statement, they said they were "profoundly disappointed" with the players' decision to "engage in a display that police officers around the nation found tasteless, offensive and inflammatory."

Outside of the stadium, demonstrators chanted and blocked traffic -- six were arrested.

Bruntrager said Wilson hopes he can move forward.

"Going forward I think he wants to translate as much of this event as he can into a teachable moment and I think he wants to share with people the lessons he learned. And I hope he does."

Darren Wilson has a new wife and a child on the way. And while his wife works for the Ferguson police department, Wilson is now unemployed. People have been trying to keep their income afloat with vigorous online fundraising efforts.

[CBS NEWS]

Resignation of Ferguson police officer Darren Wilson unlikely to halt protests
Published November 30, 2014FoxNews.com
Facebook347 Twitter636 livefyre13739 Email Print

NOW PLAYING
AP: Ferguson police officer Darren Wilson resigns
Never autoplay videos
City officials in Ferguson, Mo. were due Sunday to address the resignation of Darren Wilson, the police officer who shot and killed teenager Michael Brown in a confrontation in August that fueled protests in the St. Louis suburb and around the nation.

Stephanie Karr, Ferguson city attorney, told the Associated Press that city officials planned to make a statement regarding Wilson's resignation. Karr earlier this week said Wilson had been on paid leave pending the outcome of an internal police investigation.

Wilson's resignation was announced Saturday by one of his attorneys, Neil Bruntrager, who said his client's decision was effective immediately.

"I have been told that my continued employment may put the residents and police officers of the City of Ferguson at risk, which is a circumstance that I cannot allow,” Wilson said in his resignation letter released late Saturday.

“It was my hope to continue in police work, but the safety of other police officers and the community are of paramount importance to me. It is my hope that my resignation will allow the community to heal,” the letter read.

Meanwhile, Brown's parents planned to attend services at the church where their son's funeral was held, with the Rev. Al Sharpton scheduled to preach. 

"We were not after Wilson's job," Sharpton wrote in a statement. "We were after Michael Brown's justice."

On Saturday night, more than 100 protesters gathered near police headquarters, where they were outnumbers by officers, following the news. At least one person was arrested after a brief standoff with officers, while others wearing white masks sat in a nearby street blocking traffic. Another protester burned an American flag. By midnight, only about two dozen protesters remained.

But many seemed unfazed by the resignation. Several merely shrugged their shoulders when asked what they thought, while Rick Campbell flatly said he didn't care about the resignation, noting: "I've been protesting out here since August."

A grand jury spent more than three months reviewing evidence in the case before declining in November to issue charges against Wilson. He told jurors that he feared for his life when Brown hit him and reached for his gun.

The U.S. Justice Department is still conducting a civil rights investigation into the shooting and a separate probe of police department practices.

After the shooting, Wilson spent months in hiding and made no public statements. He broke his silence after the grand jury decision, telling ABC News that he could not have done anything differently in the encounter with Brown.

Wilson said he has a clean conscience because "I know I did my job right." Brown's shooting was the first time he fired his gun on the job, he said.

Asked whether the encounter would have unfolded the same way if Brown had been white, Wilson said yes.

 Away from the protests Saturday night, resident Victoria Rutherford said she believed Wilson should have not only resigned, but been convicted of a crime.

"I'm upset. I have a 16-year-old son. It could've been him. I feel that he was absolutely in the wrong," she said.

Another resident, Reed Voorhees, said he hoped Wilson could find similar work "someplace where he would enjoy life, and move on with his life."

In the days after the shooting, tense and sometimes violent protests popped up in and around Ferguson, a predominantly black community patrolled by a mostly white police force. Missouri Gov. Jay Nixon called in the National Guard to help.

Then on Monday night -- when prosecutors announced that a grand jury declined to indict Wilson -- the St. Louis suburb of 20,000 residents was ravaged by looting and violence.

At least a dozen commercial buildings were destroyed in Ferguson and neighboring Dellwood, mostly along West Florissant Avenue, not far from where Brown was killed. By Tuesday, Nixon had sent more than 2,200 National Guard members to the Ferguson area to support local law enforcement.

Demonstrations, which also have been held other U.S. cities, are expected to continue, though a sense of normalcy -- or at least a new normal -- has begun to settle on the city.

Police earlier Saturday reopened several blocks of West Florissant that had been barricaded off since Tuesday. Although most store windows were still boarded up, many have been decorated or spray-painted with messages saying the stores are open and welcoming shoppers.

Some business owners spent an unseasonably warm day Saturday tidying up, hoping customers soon would return.

Tracy Ballard, 44, brought her 7-year-old daughter to a store on West Florissant to buy candy and soda, before a trip to the beautician up the street.

"I feel sad for the business owners," Ballard said. "It's really sad it had to come from this. We just wanted justice. If we'd have had justice, none of this would have happened."

[FOX NEWS]

Darren Wilson, Ferguson Officer Who Shot Michael Brown, Resigns
"I have been told that my continued employment may put the residents and police officers of the City of Ferguson at risk, which is a circumstance that I cannot allow," Wilson writes

  Comment163 Email
Darren Wilson
St. Louis County Prosecutor's Office via Getty Images
Police officer Darren Wilson, August 9th, 2014, in a photograph distributed by the St. Louis County Prosecutor's Office
BY DANIEL KREPS | November 30, 2014
UPDATE: Officer Darren Wilson, who resigned from the Ferguson Police Department on Saturday, will not receive any further pay or benefits, including pension and a severance package, according to Associated Press. 

As protests continue to spread across the nation from Ferguson, Missouri and Washington, D.C. to Los Angeles and New York City – even Berlin, Germany – following the grand jury decision not to press charges in the death of Michael Brown, police officer Darren Wilson, who shot and killed Brown on August 9th, finally announced he's doing what many in the community and around the world were demanding: In a statement, Wilson revealed that he would resign as a police officer in Ferguson effective immediately.

RELATED Mike Brown
Ferguson Burns: What Constitutes Appropriate Rebellion?
"I have been told that my continued employment may put the residents and police officers of the City of Ferguson at risk, which is a circumstance that I cannot allow," Wilson wrote in a paragraph-long statement after resigning from the Ferguson police department. "It was my hope to continue in police work, but the safety of other police officers and the community are of paramount importance to me. It is my hope that my resignation will allow the community to heal."

Wilson's resignation will likely do little to stop the protests in a community still searching for justice in light of the grand jury decision, Fox News reports. "We were not after Wilson's job," Rev. Al Sharpton wrote in a statement. "We were after Michael Brown's justice."

In Wilson's only television interview with ABC News, he admitted he isn't "haunted" by the Brown shooting because "I know I did my job right." However, Wilson acknowledged his career in law enforcement was probably over, a sentiment that was echoed by his attorney Jim Towey. "Realistically speaking, Darren will never be a police officer again, and he understands that," Towey said. "Going forward it will be school, and trying to carve out a new niche, new career, for he and his family.”

It was long rumored that Wilson was negotiating his resignation with the Ferguson Police Department. However, Wilson didn't want to make any announcement regarding his job status until after the grand jury decision, as he feared resigning would influence the grand jury, Mediate reported.

The grand jury decision not to pursue charges against Wilson has sparked outrage around the country and in the music world, as artists like Killer Mike, Tom Morello and Pharrell Williams have all expressed disappointment that Michael Brown didn't get justice. Macklemore also took part in Ferguson-inspired protests in Seattle.

Read Wilson's complete resignation statement:

"I, Darren Wilson, hereby resign my commission as a police officer with the City of Ferguson effective immediately. I have been told that my continued employment may put the residents and police officers of the City of Ferguson at risk, which is a circumstance that I cannot allow. For obvious reasons, I wanted to wait until the grand jury made their decision before I officially made my decision to resign. It was my hope to continue in police work, but the safety of other police officers and the community are of paramount importance to me. It is my hope that my resignation will allow the community to heal. I would like to thank all of my supporters and fellow officers throughout this process."



Read more: http://www.rollingstone.com/culture/news/darren-wilson-ferguson-officer-who-shot-michael-brown-resigns-20141130#ixzz3KyGf3ISF 
Follow us: @rollingstone on Twitter | RollingStone on Facebook

[Rolling Stone]


Darren Wilson, Officer in Ferguson Shooting, Resigns From Police Dept.
By JACK HEALY and MONICA DAVEYNOV. 29, 2014
Continue reading the main storySlide Show

SLIDE SHOW|5 Photos
Marching From Ferguson to Missouri’s Capital
Marching From Ferguson to Missouri’s CapitalCreditRuth Fremson/The New York Times
Continue reading the main storyShare This Page
Share
Tweet
Email
Save
MORE
FERGUSON, Mo. — The white police officer a grand jury declined to indict last week in the fatal shooting of an unarmed black teenager has resigned from this city’s Police Department, his lawyer said on Saturday night.

The officer, Darren Wilson, who had worked in the department since 2011, submitted a resignation letter, said Neil J. Bruntrager, the lawyer. In the letter, first published in The St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Mr. Wilson said: “It was my hope to continue in police work, but the safety of other police officers and the community are of paramount importance to me. It is my hope that my resignation will allow the community to heal.”

For months, some here had called for Mr. Wilson, 28, to step down or be fired following the killing of Michael Brown and the unrest that followed, in August and then again last Monday, after the grand jury decision was announced.

Continue reading the main story
RELATED COVERAGE

On Rooftops of Ferguson, Volunteers Patrol, With GunsNOV. 29, 2014
A memorial to Michael Brown on Canfield Drive in Ferguson, Mo., where he was killed in August. A grand jury did not indict the police officer who shot him.Raised Hands, and the Doubts of a Grand JuryNOV. 29, 2014
Protesters staged a “die-in” at the Galleria mall in suburban St. Louis on Friday, lying down on the floor for four and a half minutes of silence to represent the hours that Michael Brown was left on the street after a police officer shot him dead.Protesters United Against Ferguson Decision, but Challenged in UnityNOV. 28, 2014
Adolphus Pruitt, of the N.A.A.C.P.'s St. Louis chapter, said the resignation “not only fulfills one of the demands of the protesters, but also provides for one of the steps necessary for the wholesale reconstructions of law enforcement in Ferguson.”

Photo

Protesters taunted police guarding Marley's Bar and Grill as they demonstrated on South Florissant Road in Ferguson, Mo., on Saturday night. Credit Ruth Fremson/The New York Times
Yet on Saturday night, as protesters gathered near the police station here, as they have on most nights since Mr. Brown’s death, many seemed unsatisfied with the news, which they said was inevitable. “We want an indictment and we’re still going to stand for that,” said Alicia Street, 29, who lives in nearby Florissant.

Late on Saturday night, there were reports of shots fired near the police station, sending the authorities speeding along South Florissant Road. A short time later, officers appeared to be searching for bullet casings in front of City Hall, as National Guard soldiers, their rifles visible, protected the building.

It was not clear whether the reported gunfire was related to Saturday’s protests.

Earlier in the day, about 100 marchers led by the N.A.A.C.P. set off from the street where Mr. Brown was killed on a weeklong walk to Missouri’s Capitol, 120 miles from this fractured city. They invoked the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s 1965 march in Selma, Ala., the Freedom Rides and other civil rights-era pilgrimages for justice.

Photo

Darren Wilson Credit St. Louis County Prosecutor's Office
The group sang as it made its way up West Florissant Avenue, past the burned-out husks of an auto-parts store, a beauty parlor and other businesses destroyed in the chaos after the grand jury’s decision. A trumpeter played “We Shall Overcome.”

“It’s going to communicate that black lives are important, that police officers are here to protect us,” said Mary Ratliff, the N.A.A.C.P.'s Missouri president, who walked near the head of the line. “We are here to say we’ll no longer stand for this.”

On Saturday, for the first time since the unrest, West Florissant was left open to traffic and pedestrians in the evening, as National Guard soldiers and police officers stood watch. The decision to leave the street open after dusk was made with little fanfare.

During the march, police cruisers crept along with the crowd, and organizers exhorted the line to keep a tight formation. The marchers paused to speak with a woman standing along the side of the road whose antiques store had been destroyed in the looting and arsons. When the marchers raised their arms into the warm November afternoon and shouted, “Hands up, don’t shoot!” two little girls watching from their front yard did the same, before ducking into their garage.

Continue reading the main story
GRAPHIC
What Happened in Ferguson?
Here’s what you need to know about the situation in Missouri, including information about how the grand jury made its decision.


 OPEN GRAPHIC
“It’s not a color thing,” said Carlos Carter, 41, who was taking a week off from his job as a barber to make the trip to the capital, Jefferson City. “We want to see everybody’s kids grow up and thrive, give everybody their chance.”

The march was part of demonstrations here and across the nation touching on police tactics, race and poverty that are stretching toward a second week since the grand jury’s decision.

More than 100 protesters marched through a shopping plaza in the affluent St. Louis suburb of Brentwood, lying on the ground in a “die-in” to represent Mr. Brown’s shooting. As they marched along the sidewalk, they were shadowed by dozens of police officers.

At the memorial to Mr. Brown near the Canfield Green apartments in Ferguson, dozens of motorcyclists swirled through the streets in a show of solidarity. Outside the St. Louis County Courthouse in Clayton, where the grand jury had met, more than 100 protesters circled in silence.

Continue reading the main story

Timeline: Tracking the Events in the Wake of Michael Brown’s Shooting
At Greater St. Mark Missionary Baptist Church here, scores of people met to sort out what comes next for the protest movement. Some were members of organizations focused on issues like poverty and criminal justice. Others said they had come here on their own, some from places like Chicago and Los Angeles.

Among items on a draft list of goals: firing the Ferguson police chief; urging passage of legislation requiring a special prosecutor to be appointed in cases like Mr. Brown’s involving the police; consolidation of small police departments; and a requirement that all Missouri police departments publish an annual report on episodes of deadly force.

The peaceful daytime demonstrations came as Gov. Jay Nixon of Missouri sent state lawmakers a letter outlining what he called an urgent need to cover the ballooning costs of maintaining hundreds of National Guard troops and state police officers who are deployed here on the streets, day and night. The governor has called a special legislative session.

The march from Ferguson to the governor’s mansion, called a “Journey for Justice” will be carried out in 17-mile increments, with marchers heading back to churches in St. Louis and Jefferson City at the end of each day.

As she marched, Regina Sias, 43, who drove here from Atlanta after seeing images of the unrest, shook her head at the sight of destroyed stores and boarded-up buildings. “This is not the answer,” she said. Farther back, Angela Hawood-Gaskin, a charter-school principal, said she was walking not just for Mr. Brown, but for her own son, whom she said had been pulled over because he is black.

“It’s all across the board,” she said. “All of our children of color are facing it.”

Correction: November 30, 2014 
Because of an editing error, an earlier version of a picture caption in a slide show with this article misstated Missouri’s capital city. It is Jefferson City, not Lansing.

John Eligon contributed reporting from Brentwood, Mo., Mitch Smith from Clayton, Mo., and Alan Blinder from Ferguson.

[NY Times]

Darren Wilson, Ferguson officer who fatally shot Michael Brown, resigns
Wilson's resignation is effective immediately, lawyer Neil Bruntrager says
The Associated Press Posted: Nov 29, 2014 6:39 PM ET Last Updated: Nov 30, 2014 1:42 AM ET

Darren Wilson, shown in a photo by the St. Louis County Prosecutor's Office, says he resigned from the Ferguson Police Department because the department told him it had received threats of violence if he remained on the force.
Darren Wilson, shown in a photo by the St. Louis County Prosecutor's Office, says he resigned from the Ferguson Police Department because the department told him it had received threats of violence if he remained on the force. (Reuters/St.Louis County Prosecutor's Office)

Ferguson march to governor's mansion begins
Ferguson march to governor's mansion begins 7:19


185 shares
	
Facebook
	
Twitter
	
Reddit
	
Google
	
Share
	
Email
Related Stories

Ferguson protests: 7-day march to Gov. Jay Nixon's home begins
Ferguson officer Darren Wilson's grand jury testimony: 7 revelations
Ferguson shooting: Why police rarely face criminal consequences
Ferguson and cop cams: useful tool or trojan horse?
America's Ferguson protests put police authority on trial
External Links

Wilson speaks to St. Louis Post-Dispatch about resignation
(Note: CBC does not endorse and is not responsible for the content of external links.)
The white police officer who killed Michael Brown has resigned from the Ferguson Police Department, his attorney said Saturday, nearly four months after the fatal confrontation with the black 18-year-old that fueled protests in the St. Louis suburb and across the nation.

Darren Wilson, 28, has been on administrative leave since the shooting on Aug. 9. His resignation was announced Saturday by one of his attorneys, Neil Bruntrager. The resignation is effective immediately, Bruntrager said. He declined further immediate comment but said he would release more details Saturday night.

7 revelations from Wilson's grand jury testimony
Why police rarely face criminal consequences
Are cop cams a useful tool or trojan horse?
The attorney for the Brown family, Benjamin Crump, did not immediately return phone and email messages seeking comment.

Ferguson officials planned to make a statement on Wilson's resignation Sunday, said Stephanie Karr, city attorney for Ferguson. Karr earlier this week said Wilson had been on paid leave pending the outcome of an internal police investigation.

Resigned out of 'own free will'

Wilson told the St. Louis Post-Dispatch newspaper he was stepping down out of his "own free will" after the police department told him it had received threats of violence if he remained an employee.

"I'm not willing to let someone else get hurt because of me," he told the newspaper.

The protest began outside of Kitchener City Hall. People gathered around the flagpole with homemade placards that had messages of love and support for Ferguson, and also anger for the racism they say persists in both Canada and the U.S. 
1 of 8
The shooting led to a national debate about race and police power.

Wilson fatally shot Brown after a scuffle in the middle of a street, where Brown's body lay for several hours as police investigated and a crowd of angry onlookers gathered. Several days of tense and at times violent protests followed, prompting Missouri Gov. Jay Nixon to call in the National Guard to help.

Some witnesses have said Brown had his hands up when Wilson shot him. Wilson told a grand jury that reviewed the case that he feared for his life when Brown hit him and reached for his gun.

The grand jury spent more than three months reviewing evidence in the case before declining in November to issue any charges against Wilson.

On Monday night, when prosecutors announced that the grand jury declined to indict Wilson, the St. Louis suburb of 20,000 residents was ravaged by looting and violence. By Tuesday, Nixon had sent more than 2,200 National Guard members to the area.

'We just wanted justice. If we'd have had justice, none of this would have happened.'
- Tracy Ballard, 44
Though protests calmed significantly, more than 100 people have been arrested since Monday.

Demonstrations, which also have been held other U.S. cities, were expected to continue.

Police earlier Saturday reopened several blocks of a major street that had been barricaded off since Tuesday. Some business owners spent the day cleaning up, hoping customers soon would return.

Tracy Ballard, 44, brought her seven-year-old daughter to buy candy and soda.

"I feel sad for the business owners," Ballard said. "It's really sad it had to come from this. We just wanted justice. If we'd have had justice, none of this would have happened."

The U.S. Justice Department is still conducting a civil rights investigation into the shooting and a separate probe of police department practices.

TIMELINE I The shooting of Michael Brown and Ferguson protests
#BlackLivesMatter: Hashtag decries decision not to indict Ferguson cop
More than 100 protesters gathered near police headquarters, where they were outnumbered by officers, following the news. At least one person was arrested after a brief standoff, but many seemed unfazed by the resignation. Several shrugged.​

"We were not after Wilson's job," the Rev. Al Sharpton, a civil rights activist, said in a statement to the AP. "We were after Michael Brown's justice."

Ferguson Police Chief Tom Jackson didn't immediately return a message left on his cellphone seeking comment.

Wilson says his conscience is clean

After the shooting, Wilson spent months in hiding and made no public statements. He broke his silence after the grand jury decision, telling ABC News that he could not have done anything differently in the encounter with Brown.

'We were not after Wilson's job. We were after Michael Brown's justice.'
- Rev. Al Sharpton, a civil rights activist
Wilson said he has a clean conscience because "I know I did my job right." Brown's shooting was the first time he fired his gun on the job, he said.

Asked whether the encounter would have unfolded the same way if Brown had been white, Wilson said yes.

Wilson began his career in nearby Jennings before moving to the Ferguson job a few years ago. He had no previous complaints against him and a good career record, according to Police Chief Thomas Jackson, who called Wilson "an excellent police officer."

A few months before the shooting, Wilson had received a commendation for detaining a suspect in a drug case.

[CBC]
