2 shot after trying to elude officers, ram police car
POSTED 5:55 AM, NOVEMBER 21, 2014, BY CHUCK HICKEY, UPDATED AT 11:16AM, NOVEMBER 21, 2014
FACEBOOK18TWITTER4GOOGLELINKEDINPINTERESTEMAIL
 Denver Police officers shot two suspects who tried to ram a police car and elude officers in Commerce City on Thursday, Nov. 20, 2014.
Denver Police officers shot two suspects who tried to ram a police car and elude officers in Commerce City on Thursday, Nov. 20, 2014.
COMMERCE CITY, Colo. — Two suspects were shot during a confrontation with Denver Police after they allegedly tried to elude officers and rammed a police car Thursday night, the Commerce City Police Department said.

Denver Police tried to stop a vehicle car on Interstate 70 and Havana Street about 11 p.m. for a possible DUI and hit-and-run. The car did not pull over and police did not pursue the car.

Officers found the vehicle a short time later parked between two semi-tractor trailers at 56th Avenue and Holly Street in Commerce City.

When the officers approached the vehicle, the suspects tried to ram the Denver Police car in an attempt to get away. Police then shot both suspects.

The two men were taken to a hospital to be treated for their wounds. Both are expected to survive. No officers were injured.


[Fox 31 Denver]


COMMERCE CITY -- Commerce City police and the Adams County Critical Incident team are investigating a shooting that involved officers from the Denver Police Department.

It happened around 11 p.m. Nov. 20. Commerce City detective Mike Saunders said Denver officers tried to pull a car over on suspicion of drunken driving and eluding. The car didn't stop and, Saunders said, officers didn't chase. However, they were able to find the vehicle parked between two semi-tractor trailer rigs at 56th Avenue and Holly Street in Commerce City.

Saunders said when officers moved toward the car, the driver tried to get away a second time. The car struck a Denver police vehicle. That's when shots were fired.

Two men in the vehicle were hit and are at a local hospital for treatment. Saunders said both are expected to survive. No officers were hurt.

Saunders said his department is looking into the criminal behavior of the two men. The critical incident team is looking into the officer-involved shooting.

No names have been released because of the ongoing investigation.

Denver police shoot, wound two in Commerce City

[Commerce City]

Denver police shoot, wound two suspects in Commerce City traffic stop
By Jesse Paul
The Denver Post
POSTED:   11/21/2014 06:20:20 AM MST5 COMMENTS| UPDATED:   13 DAYS AGO



WATCH DPTV: Molly Hughes with today's top stories

Denver police shot and wounded two people in Commerce City late Thursday after the pair tried to flee in a vehicle, striking a police cruiser.

Officers first spotted the two near Interstate 70 and Havana Street about 11 p.m. when police tried to stop the driver on suspicion of driving under the influence and eluding. When the vehicle didn't stop, officers didn't pursue, police said.

Officers found the vehicle a short time later parked between two semi-trailers near the intersection of East 56th Avenue and Holly Street in Commerce City. When officers approached the vehicle on foot, the driver tried to flee and shots were fired.

Officer-involved shooting scene
Police said there was an officer-involved shooting near the intersection of 56th and Holly early Friday morning, Nov. 21, 2014. (Steve Nehf, The Denver Post)
Both occupants were taken to a hospital with what are thought to be non-life-threatening injuries, police say.

Commerce City police Detective Michael Saunders said investigators are working to determine whether the suspects were armed, adding that he could not speak further on the case.

Police in Commerce City are investigating the "criminal behavior" of the two people shot while the Adams County Critical Incident Team is investigating the shooting.

"As with any officer-involved shooting, there will be an internal review to make sure it was done within police," said Denver police Detective Mary McIver.

McIver said one of the officers involved has been placed on "non-line assignment" and referred questions about the external investigation into the incident to Commerce City police and the critical incident team.

The shooting happened in an industrial area just outside of Denver.

[Denver Post]

COMMERCE CITY- Denver Police shot two suspects in a car late Thursday night in Commerce City, according to police.

Around 11 p.m. on Thursday, Denver Police tried to stop a car around Interstate 70 and Havana Street for a possible DUI and hit-and-run.

The car did not pull over for officers, and Denver Police did not pursue the car, according to Commerce City Police.

Officers later found the vehicle at the 5600 block of Holly Street in Commerce City.

As the officers tried to walk up to the vehicle, the suspects allegedly tried to get away and hit the Denver Police car.

Denver Police then shot the suspects. Both men are being treated for injuries and are expected to survive.

No officers were injured.

[9 News]

Denver Police Shoot 2 In Vehicle Who Tried To Ram Them
November 21, 2014 6:58 AM
Share on email
View Comments
(credit: CBS)
(credit: CBS)
Related Tags: Adams County, Commerce City, Denver Police, Officer-Involved Shooting, Shooting
COMMERCE CITY, Colo. (CBS4) – Denver police officers shot two people in Commerce City Thursday night when they say they came at them with a car.
The crime happened at approximately 11 a.m. in the 5600 block of East 56th Avenue, near Holly Street and just off Interstate 270.
Police said officers tried to stop a car near Interstate 70 and Havana Street but the driver wouldn’t stop. Then they spotted it shortly afterwards between two tractor trailers on Holly Street.
Police approached the car and the driver took off, hitting a police vehicle.
Police then fired, hitting two people the car. They were both treated at a hospital and were expected to survive.
No officers were hurt.
Authorities with Commerce City Police and Adams County are investigating the case.
[CBS Denver]
