ISIS Now Has a Network of Military Affiliates in 11 Countries Around the World
By Katie Zavadski Follow @katiezavadski
644
Shares

Share 388
Tweet 195
Share 47
Share 14
Email
23
Print

Photo: Saood Rehman/EPA
ISIS is now well known for its widespread appeal to individual jihadis around the world. As the New York Times noted on Friday, "the black standard of the Islamic State has been popping up all over" in Pakistan lately. But beyond the lower-stakes demonstrations of popular sympathy, about a dozen militant organizations in nine countries (in addition to Iraq and Syria) have made formal pledges of support to the group, making them, in a very real sense, part of ISIS's fighting force. Think of them as ISIS's self-appointed foreign bases.

Veryan Khan, the editorial director of the Terrorism Research & Analysis Consortium, explained the process to Intelligencer. Support for ISIS among other radical groups, she said, manifests in one or more of three ways. At the most basic level, members of a group can show support for ISIS ideology by sporting the group's flags and logo. Groups that are more committed can pledge loyalty to ISIS, which Khan describes as a symbolic statement that doesn't really confer any type of formal alliance. The most committed make a formal declaration of bay'ah, or allegiance, and become official allies. (Such pledges were historically given to caliphs.) What shape, exactly, these alliances take can vary, in part based on the distance between Baghdadi and central leadership in the group. However, groups "don't have to fall into the top category to be strong supporters," Khan cautioned.

TRAC has identified at least 12 groups outside Iraq and Syria that have made a formal pledge of allegiance to ISIS and Baghdadi. (There may be more who have done so without publicizing such an agreement.) While some of them are large, established groups, others are comparatively new and unknown. In most cases, precise membership numbers are not available.

Here is a country-by-country look at ISIS's expanding network of partner groups.

Pakistan
On Monday, Taliban splinter group Jundallah joined a handful of other Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan affliliates that have already pledged allegiance to ISIS. "[ISIS] are our brothers, whatever plan they have we will support them," a Jundallah spokesman said. Taliban leadership has historic ties to central Al Qaeda leaders, and so a pledge of allegiance to ISIS is a strong sign that Al Qaeda is losing support. ISIS has also gained support from other Pakistani militants like Tehreek-e-Khilafat, a Taliban-linked group that became its first Pakistani supporter in July, and Jamaat al-Ahrar, a significant group that split from the TTP in August.

Egypt
Islamic terrorist groups are particularly active in Egypt's lawless Sinai peninsula, and the most well-known of them is Ansar Beit al-Maqdis, with about 1,000 militants. The group pledged allegiance to ISIS and Baghdadi in November because, the New York Times reports, they hope such a partnership will give them more resources and weapons to fight the more secular leadership in Cairo. (Islamist president Mohamed Morsi was deposed and replaced by a military leader, but even the Muslim Brotherhood wouldn't have been enough for the group.) "To our people in Egypt, what are you waiting for after the violation of your dignity?" the group said in an audio statement that promised to "obey" Baghdadi. "When will you take out your swords to face your enemies?" After pledging allegiance, they also changed their name from one meaning Supporters of the Holy House to Wilayat Sinai — the province of Sinai. Baghdadi specifically mentioned this group in an audio statement released last week, further raising their profile.

Algeria
Like the Pakistani groups, the Algeria-based Soldiers of the Caliphate, also known as Jund al-Khilafa, had ties to central Al Qaeda leaders like Osama bin Laden and Ayman al-Zawahiri. The Soldiers were a splinter group of Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb and formally pledged their allegiance to ISIS in mid-September. "You have in the Islamic Maghreb men if you order them they will obey you," leader Gouri Abdelmalek, a.k.a. Khaled Abu Suleimane, said in a statement. "[AQIM] has deviated from the true path." Less than two weeks after pledging allegiance, the caliphate Soldiers beheaded French citizen Hervé Gourdel after France participated in airstrikes on ISIS in Iraq. For Khan, this action makes the Soldiers more significant than many of the other groups who've pledged allegiance. "The caliphate soldiers have actually beheaded on the Islamic State's behalf," she says.

Libya
A relatively new and unknown group of radicals took over the coastal Libyan city of Derna back in April. The organization, which calls itself the Islamic Youth Shura Council, was founded earlier this year. While, like many groups, it initially allied itself with Al Qaeda, IYSC quickly switched allegiances to ISIS in June. "It is incumbent on us to support this oppressed Islamic State that is taken as an enemy by those near and those far, among the infidels or the hypocrites, or those with dead souls alike," its statement read. In October, IYSC declared that Derna was now an outpost of the ISIS caliphate known as Wilayat Derna. This is one of the few ISIS outposts that actually controls physical area, and, Khan worries, the group's influence may spread inland because of the country's ongoing political instability.

Philippines
Abu Sayyaf, a Philippines-based group dedicated to carving out an Islamic province in the country, pledged allegiance to ISIS over the summer. (It may have had vague ties with Al Qaeda at some point in the preceding decades.) "We pledge to obey [Baghdadi] on anything which our heart's desire or not and to value him more than anyone else," Abu Sayyaf leader Isnilon Hapilon read in a YouTube video. "We will not take any emir other than him unless we see in him any obvious act of disbelief that could be questioned by Allah in the hereafter." The group subsequently kidnapped two German hostages, who they threatened to behead if Germany didn't pay a ransom and denounce actions against ISIS. The pair was later released, reportedly after the militants received about $5 million in ransom.

Israel/Gaza
Not much is known about Gaza's Ansar Beit al-Maqdis group, except that the organization is believed to have fired some rockets into Israel during this summer's war and is believed to have recently pledged allegiance to ISIS and changed its name to al-Dawla al-Islamiyya — the Islamic State.

Lebanon
In Lebanon, Free Sunnis of Baalbek Brigade is a Sunni militant group fighting against Shia influence. It has engaged in violent struggle against Shia groups, particularly against Hezbollah, and also took responsibility for the 2013 bombing of the Iranian embassy in Beirut. It gave bay'ah to ISIS at the end of June, writing on Twitter: "With utmost honour and pride, we announce our allegiance to the jihadist Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi as the Caliph for Muslims." (Hezbollah, its Lebanese rival, has also been engaged in the Syrian conflict, fighting ISIS and ther rebel groups on Bashar al-Assad's behalf.)

Indonesia
Abu Bakar Bashir, the incarcerated leader of the Java-based Ashorut Tauhid movement, pledged allegiance to ISIS from his jail cell in mid-July. (Bashir is serving a 15-year sentence for running a jihadi training camp.) The group broke off from a larger terror organization known as Jemaah Islamiyah and has taken responsibility for church bombings and the like in Indonesia. Not everyone in his organization agreed with Bashir's decision, though, and top leaders as well as some of Bashir's own sons left to form a different organization. 

Jordan
A youth militant movement called Sons of the Call for Tawhid and Jihad is ISIS's main affiliate in Jordan. The group began as a branch of the country's salafist movement and now makes up the majority of its members. It denounced Al Qaeda leaders in July, adding that it is "the right and duty of all to support [ISIS]." It is believed to have several thousand members.
[NY MAG]

Influence of ISIS spreads to Egypt as militants decapitate four Israeli 'Mossad spies' in copycat video that echoes recent Islamic State beheadings in Iraq
WARNING GRAPHIC CONTENT
Sinai-based militant group Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis releases beheading video
Militant group claims the men had been spying for Mossad
Security source said headless corpses found in Sinai earlier this month 
Men had reportedly been abducted two days earlier in Sheikh Zuwaid
By JAMES RUSH FOR MAILONLINE
PUBLISHED: 10:52 GMT, 29 August 2014 | UPDATED: 15:26 GMT, 29 August 2014
     
View comments
Militants in Egypt claim to have beheaded four men they had accused of being Israeli Mossad spies in a video which appears to have been inspired by the tactics of the Islamic State. 
Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis, which has been described as Egypt's most dangerous militant group, released the video, in which it accused the four Egyptians of spying for Israel's Mossad agency.
In the video, the captives can be seen kneeling on the floor with armed men in black masks standing behind them as one of the militants reads out a statement. Minutes later the four men have been beheaded. 
WARNING: GRAPHIC CONTENT 
Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis, which has been described as Egypt's most dangerous militant group, has released a shocking new video in which four men, accused of being Israeli Mossad spies, are beheaded
+9
Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis, which has been described as Egypt's most dangerous militant group, has released a shocking new video in which four men, accused of being Israeli Mossad spies, are beheaded
In the video, the captives can be seen kneeling on the floor with armed men in black masks standing behind them as one of the militants reads out a statement. Minutes later the four men have been beheaded
+9
In the video, the captives can be seen kneeling on the floor with armed men in black masks standing behind them as one of the militants reads out a statement. Minutes later the four men have been beheaded
Security sources have said four headless corpses were found in the Sinai Peninsula earlier this month
+9
Security sources have said four headless corpses were found in the Sinai Peninsula earlier this month
Security sources said four headless corpses were found in the Sinai Peninsula earlier this month - the first time any decapitations had been made public in Egypt.
The men had reportedly been abducted by gunmen two days earlier while driving in the town of Sheikh Zuwaid, which is just a few miles from the Gaza Strip.
The filmed killings are reminiscent of images posted online by militant group Islamic State, which has seized parts of Iraq and Syria.
RELATED ARTICLES
Previous
1
Next
Jihadists issuing their warning that the beheadings will continue if the U.S. continues to support the Kurds
Hours after shocking world with desert execution of 300...

'We don't have a strategy yet': Obama stuns Washington by...
SHARE THIS ARTICLE
Share
This has led to suggestions that Sinai-based Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis might have been inspired by the group, notorious for beheadings and executions.
The Sinai militants are not believed to be officially linked to Islamic State insurgents. 
However, Egyptian intelligence officials say the group has influenced Egyptian militants who are based just over the border with Libya, Reuters has reported.
The officials say the Libya-based fighters have also established contacts with Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis.
Sinai-based Jihadists carry out execution of suspected 'Mossad...

 In the video, militant group Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis presented what it said were confessions by the men
+9
In the video, militant group Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis presented what it said were confessions by the men
Two of the men said they had spent time in Israeli jails for smuggling. The other two said Mossad had paid them for information
+9
Two of the men said they had spent time in Israeli jails for smuggling. The other two said Mossad had paid them for information
The group said the men provided intelligence used in an airstrike on July 23 in northern Sinai that killed three of its fighters
+9
The group said the men provided intelligence used in an airstrike on July 23 in northern Sinai that killed three of its fighters
Militants in the Sinai have stepped up attacks on policemen and soldiers since then-army chief Abdel Fattah al-Sisi toppled President Mohamed Mursi of the Muslim Brotherhood in July 2013 
+9
Militants in the Sinai have stepped up attacks on policemen and soldiers since then-army chief Abdel Fattah al-Sisi toppled President Mohamed Mursi of the Muslim Brotherhood in July 2013 
Though the four dead men were civilians, security sources had said initially that they might have been targeted for their perceived allegiance to the police and army.
In the video, Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis presented what it said were confessions by the men. Two of them said they had spent time in Israeli jails for smuggling. The other two said Mossad had paid them for information.
The group said the men provided intelligence used in an airstrike on July 23 in northern Sinai that killed three of its fighters. At the time, the Egyptian army said no Israeli aircraft or drones had crossed into Egyptian airspace.
Militants in the Sinai have stepped up attacks on policemen and soldiers since then-army chief Abdel Fattah al-Sisi toppled President Mohamed Mursi of the Muslim Brotherhood in July 2013. 
The filmed killings are reminiscent of images posted online by militant group Islamic State (pictured), which has seized parts of Iraq and Syra
+9
The filmed killings are reminiscent of images posted online by militant group Islamic State (pictured), which has seized parts of Iraq and Syra
The attacks initially targeted security forces in Sinai - a remote but strategic part of Egypt located between Israel, the Gaza Strip and the Suez Canal - but they have since extended their reach, with bombings on the mainland. 
It was reported today that Islamic State had released a new decapitation video, threatening America for the second time and urging the Kurds to break from their alliance with the West against the caliphate.
Just hours after Islamic State released shocking footage of the mass execution of 300 Syrian national army soldiers in the Syrian desert, the group issued a second warning to the United States.
The grainy video, accompanied by the hashtag '2ndAmessagetoAmerica', shows the vicious beheading of a Kurdish soldier, who was part of a group of 15 fighters likely to have been captured by Islamic State during the fighting in Iraq. 
It was reported today that Islamic State had released a new decapitation video, threatening America for the second time and urging the Kurds to break from their alliance with the West against the caliphate
+9
It was reported today that Islamic State had released a new decapitation video, threatening America for the second time and urging the Kurds to break from their alliance with the West against the caliphate
The group's first warning ten days ago was entitled 'A Message to America' and showed the decapitation of American journalist James Foley.
In the latest video, the captors first issue a warning they will continue to decapitate prisoners should America continue to support the Kurds in their fight against the Islamic State.
They then behead one of the captives on a sandy roadside in Iraq, where the Great Mosque of Mosul can be seen in the background.


Read more: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2737603/Influence-ISIS-spreads-Egypt-militants-decapitate-four-Israeli-Mossad-spies-video-echoes-recent-Islamist-beheadings.html#ixzz3KyKYMGSn 
Follow us: @MailOnline on Twitter | DailyMail on Facebook

[Daily Mail]

In its war to create a caliphate across Syria and Iraq, the Islamic State is opening a front in North Africa, where affiliated militants are wreaking havoc in eastern Libya and Egypt’s Sinai Peninsula — presenting a complex challenge for Washington and its allies in the region.

Through its savvy use of social media and slick production of recruitment videos, the Islamic State — also known by the acronyms ISIS and ISIL — is attracting a growing number of individual jihadis to its harsh interpretation of Islamic, or Shariah, law.

“ISIL’s stated goal of expanding its caliphate and its adherence to a strict form of Shariah has definitely resonated with a collection of extremists across North Africa, who appear to be mimicking ISIL’s rhetoric and brutality,” said a U.S. intelligence official who spoke on the condition of anonymity in order to discuss security issues freely.

PHOTOS: BOOM! U.S. military turns terror targets to rubble

What remains to be seen is whether the region will face a surge of unbridled Islamic State-style violence, including beheadings. Counterterrorism analysts say there is little doubt of that — especially in Libya, where the government is under threat of being overrun by militants, and in Egypt, where the military has struggled to contain Sinai extremists for years.

“I don’t think there’s any doubt that the Islamic State is going to commit and claim responsibility for an increasing number of attacks in North Africa, both in Libya and in the Sinai during the year ahead,” said Thomas Joscelyn, a senior fellow at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies in Washington.

“But it’s not yet clear how it’s going to play out,” Mr. Joscelyn said. “If they go in the direction of more horror killings the way the Islamic State is doing in Syria and Iraq, they may go after Christians and others, and that could end up triggering sectarian violence in Egypt. But that remains to be seen.”

PHOTOS: Top 10 U.S. fighter jets

The U.S. intelligence community regards the Islamic State as the world’s most violent terrorist organization, and officials say its leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, sees himself as a kind of Osama bin Laden figure.

But Mr. Joscelyn, who writes about the Islamic State for the Long War Journal, says al-Baghdadi has had limited success in persuading jihadi groups around the world to abandon bin Laden’s core al Qaeda movement and join his caliphate.

“You have to understand the context here that al-Baghdadi and his minions have made a huge push over the last year to basically try and co-opt or win the allegiance of all these jihadi groups around the world — basically saying, ‘Hey, everybody needs to sign on with us now because we’re the strong horse,’” said Mr. Joscelyn. “But that effort was, for the most part, a total failure. The Islamic State was actually rejected far more than they were accepted.”

Where the group has had success is among young jihadists seeking to distinguish themselves from their elders by declaring “baya,” or pledging allegiance, to al-Baghdadi. That seems to be occurring most often in eastern Libya and the Sinai Peninsula in Egypt.

Early this month, a group of militants claiming to control the Libyan town of Darna — long a hotbed of al Qaeda-inspired extremism between Benghazi and Libya’s border with Egypt — declared allegiance to al-Baghdadi.

The militants were reportedly from the local Islamic Youth Shura Council, an extremist outfit that established itself in Darna in March. Nonetheless, al-Baghdadi swiftly ordered one of his up-and-coming followers in Syria — a Yemeni with the nom de guerre Abu al-Baraa al-Azdi — to travel to Darna and serve as the Islamic State’s “emir” there.

The development opened a front on the already chaotic landscape of jihadi groups vying for control of Libya. But U.S. intelligence officials say it is not clear whether the Islamic State will be able to carve out territory in the nation.

“Darna appears particularly vulnerable to ISIL inspiration,” said the U.S. intelligence official. “But the activities of ISIL-inspired groups also have been met with distaste by rival Islamist militias.”

With more seasoned Libyan militants resisting al-Baghdadi’s push for influence, analysts say, a development hundreds of miles to the east, in the Sinai, is likely to prove more significant to the Islamic State’s future.



Read more: http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2014/nov/27/islamic-state-opening-front-in-north-africa/#ixzz3KyLPNTxl 
Follow us: @washtimes on Twitter

At about the time al-Baghdadi was receiving pledges from Darna, members of the Sinai extremist outfit Ansar Beit al-Maqdis were declaring allegiance to the Islamic State.

How the group issued its declaration has prompted particular concern in Washington: Ansar Beit al-Maqdis circulated a 30-minute video that apparently was produced by the sophisticated digital propaganda arm of the Islamic State.

Mr. Joscelyn said the Sinai group’s move suggests a heightened level of coordination with the Islamic State and represents the “most significant declaration of allegiance” that al-Baghdadi has been able to attract globally.

There is uncertainty about how Ansar Beit al-Maqdis, whose senior members had been aligned with bin Laden’s al Qaeda, will represent the Islamic State inside Egypt.

“It’s pretty clear there’s actually been a split within ABM on the issue of joining al-Baghdadi’s group,” Mr. Joscelyn said.

Younger members have been “itching for a while to get in with ISIL,” he said, but an older faction rooted in the Nile Valley “did not want to go along with it.”

Internal friction aside, regional news reports suggest the Islamic State is helping Ansar Beit al-Maqdis set up terrorist cells beyond the Sinai in Egypt’s heartland, raising concerns about Cairo’s ability to respond.

Security in Egypt has been precarious since massive Arab Spring demonstrations drove dictator Hosni Mubarak from power in 2011.

Jihadists in Sinai appeared relatively appeased during a brief period after the Muslim Brotherhood was elected to power in Cairo, but a subsequent coup that ousted the Islamists has fanned tension on the peninsula.

Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, a former military leader, has tried to wage a bare-knuckled war against extremists, and some counterterrorism analysts believe he has been successful.

Seth Jones, a national security analyst with the Rand Corp., said Mr. el-Sisi’s forces have “effectively decimated” an al Qaeda-aligned group known as the Muhammad Jamal Network, whose members are said to have participated in the September 2012 attack on the U.S. diplomatic compound in Benghazi.

Still, a tribal sheik in Sinai told Al-Monitor recently that Egyptians are losing faith in the military’s claim to winning the war on terrorism.

The sheik, who spoke anonymously and whom Al-Monitor described as “close to the armed forces intelligence services” on the peninsula, said the “problem got worse” after a video that was circulating showed Ansar Beit al-Maqdis carrying out an Oct. 24 attack on a Sinai military base that killed 32 Egyptian soldiers.

Such developments have prompted some in Washington to call for increased U.S. counterterrorism and military support for the el-Sisi government.

“The longer the insurgency in the Sinai continues, the more chance it’s going to make it in a significant way into the Nile Valley, to Cairo and Alexandria, where the government and all the people are,” said David Schenker, a counterterrorism and Arab politics analyst at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.



Read more: http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2014/nov/27/islamic-state-opening-front-in-north-africa/?page=2#ixzz3KyLT0kcc 
Follow us: @washtimes on Twitter

“I don’t think it’s going to be bringing down the regime in Cairo anytime soon, but certainly we’re going to see the possibility of a lot more terrorism in the heartland of Egypt,” Mr. Schenker said, adding that “even before ABM joined ISIS, they were holding their own against the Egyptian military.”

“At a minimum, we should be giving the el-Sisi government all the help they need to defeat this,” he said. “But we’re not talking about what we’re doing with the Egyptians, and there’s a feeling certainly in Cairo that we’re not doing all that we can.”



Read more: http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2014/nov/27/islamic-state-opening-front-in-north-africa/?page=3#ixzz3KyLWCxzf 
Follow us: @washtimes on Twitter

[Washington Times]


Groups In Egypt And Libya Pledge Allegiance To ISIS
By: DSWright Tuesday November 11, 2014 4:22 am	
Share on facebook
4
Share on twitter
10
Share on google_plusone_share
0
 google plus iconShare on email

Militant Islamist groups in both Libya and Egypt have now pledged loyalty to ISIS and recognized the Islamic State. Despite efforts by governments in Iraq, Syria, neighboring states, and the US it appears ISIS has been able to continue to spread throughout the region. Though it is, in theory, incumbent upon Muslims to pledge loyalty to a caliphate once it is declared, most Muslims do not recognize the authority of ISIS. Not only do not all Muslims hold the theological views of ISIS but even many of those that do have yet to recognize ISIS as the best vehicle for the realization of the caliphate.

However, Ansar Beit al-Maqdis of Egypt and Jaish al-Isla of Libya have pledged their loyalty to ISIS and sought to both recruit others as well as emulate ISIS’ tactics of taking and holding territory. Ansar Beit al-Maqdis is of a particular concern given both their location and capabilities while Jaish al-Isla appears more indicative of the collapse of Libya into fragments, providing another opening for ISIS.

On Monday, Egypt’s most dangerous militant group, Ansar Beit al-Maqdis, also pledged obedience to the organization that calls itself the Islamic State, becoming its first significant international affiliate in the bet that the link will provide new money, weapons and recruits to battle the government in Cairo…

The decision injects the Islamic State into the most populous and historically most influential Arab nation, a milestone weeks into an American-led bombing campaign against its strongholds in Syria and Iraq. The endorsement is a major victory for the Islamic State in its rivalry with Al Qaeda — a group with deep Egyptian roots — and could now help recruit fighters and affiliates far beyond Egypt.

The news comes amid reports that the leader of ISIS, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, was wounded in a US airstrike in Iraq recently. Baghdadi is the proclaimed caliph of the Islamic State and is the founder of ISIS. Whether the loss of him as a commander would be outweighed by the recruiting tool of his martyrdom is hard to say.

What does seem to be clear is that the United States’ involvement in the fight against ISIS is not isolating the group. If anything, it has increased their popularity in the region and legitimized them among other Islamic militant groups.

[Fire Dog Lake]

ISIS Wannabes Claim They Killed an American in Egypt
Egyptian militants who've pledged loyalty to the leader of the self-proclaimed Islamic State brag about killing a worker from Arkansas.
ISTANBUL, Turkey — A militant Egyptian group that recently pledged allegiance to the so-called Islamic State claimed late Sunday it was behind the killing in August of a 58-year-old American oil worker, who died during a carjacking in Egypt’s Western Desert.

Formerly known as Ansar Beit Al-Maqdis (roughly, Champions of Jerusalem), the group now calling itself Sinai Province announced the slaying on a Twitter account and posted images of oil worker William Henderson’s passport and identification cards. It did not say how the slaying was carried out.

The announcement will add to rising alarm about the safety of Westerners working and vacationing in Egypt. Months ago the U.S. State Department posted an extensive safety warning about travel to Egypt, urging Americans to avoid protests because they can escalate quickly into violence and cautioning about the dangers of terrorism.

U.S. officials say the travel alert may now be hardened in the light of the claimed jihadist killing of Henderson, which is being investigated by the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation, The U.S. embassy in Cairo has so far remained silent on the jihadist claim.

The oil worker from Fayetteville, Arkansas, was working in Egypt for Houston-based Apache Corporation on a joint oil venture and an obituary published by his family in the Enid News and Eagle in Oklahoma, where he went to high school, said he “passed suddenly” on August 6.

In an email statement an Apache spokeswoman, Castlen Kennedy, said: “The tragic carjacking incident this past August involving our colleague Bill Henderson is still under investigation by the U.S. government.” She added: “Out of respect for the family and the ongoing nature of the investigation, I cannot comment further.” Henderson had worked for Apache for 28 years.

The Sinai-based jihadi group claiming responsibility for the oil worker’s murder has grown increasingly proficient carrying out attacks and sophisticated selecting targets based on their “strategic value.” It has conducted scores of attacks since the July 2013 ouster by the Egyptian armed forces of Islamist President Mohammed Morsi, and with each blast or shooting the group has been expanding its theater of operations. Originally it was a low-level insurgency mainly confined to the Sinai Peninsula . but recently it has been hitting at high-profile targets and foreigners elsewhere in the country—including right in the heart of Cairo.

With each blast or shooting the group has been expanding its theater of operations.
In January, the group rocked Egypt’s capital with four blasts —the biggest targeting the city’s police headquarters in the deadliest explosion to hit Cairo in living memory. The bombing of the police headquarters that left four people dead and wounded 80 marked an escalation in jihadist violence. It also undermined also claims by the army that it can contain terrorism, which has been spurred by the military’s ouster of Morsi, the country’s first democratically elected president.

David Barnett, a researcher on Egyptian jihadist groups at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies, a Washington-based think tank, noted the coordinated bombings were “the first ever multi-pronged attacks launched by the group outside North Sinai.”

Four months earlier in September 2013 the jihadists came close to assassinating Interior Minister Mohamed Ibrahim. The Egyptian government claims the group has links with the now outlawed Muslim Brotherhood. The Brotherhood has denied this repeatedly and vehemently, but a former Muslim Brotherhood member, Sameh Eid,  calls Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis “the military wing of the Muslim Brotherhood.”

In a separate social media statement at the weekend the Sinai Province claimed responsibility for nearly a dozen attacks in the past month, saying it had blown up six armored vehicles, killed seven police officers and conscripts, and wrecked the house of a man accused of spying for the army. In northern Sinai in October the group killed 31 soldiers during a raid on an army checkpoint. That attack prompted the government to declare a three-month state of emergency in parts of North Sinai.

The sophistication of the terrorism has gone hand-in-hand with a growing tie-up between Egyptian militants and, at first, al Qaeda and subsequently  Islamic State, widely known as ISIS or ISIL. Some analysts have identified Ramzi Mowafi, an Egyptian physician who was close to Osama bin Laden, as one of the veterans shaping the burgeoning insurgency.

In August 2013 The Daily Beast reported that American intelligence had intercepted an Internet-based conference call between al-Qaeda’s leader, Egyptian-born Ayman al-Zawahiri, and representatives of 20 jihadist groups, including some from the Sinai Peninsula. Since then both al Qaeda and the Islamic State have been seemingly vying for the group’s allegiance—a rivalry won by the latter when last month Ansar Beit Al-Maqdis changed its name to Sinai Province and pledged itself to Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the ISIS leader.

“After entrusting God we decided to swear allegiance to the emir of the faithful Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, caliph of the Muslims in Syria and Iraq and in other countries,” the group announced.

On Sunday, an Egyptian court designated formally the Islamic State and any of its affiliates as terrorists and banned it in the country. The court ruling came, as it emerged that jihadists successfully hijacked in the Port of Damietta in northern Egypt in November an Egyptian missile boat, planning to use it to help capture an Israeli ship for leverage in negotiations for the release of Palestinian prisoners. The plot was thwarted when other Egyptian naval vessels intercepted the hijacked ship and, according to Egyptian authorities, neutralized it during an exchange of fire.

An Egyptian military spokesman said in a statement that five sailors were injured and eight remain missing. Several militants were killed and 32 arrested.

[Daily Beast]
