Experts Weigh Officer’s Decisions Leading to Fatal Shooting of Michael Brown
By MICHAEL SCHWIRTZ and RICHARD A. OPPEL Jr.NOV. 26, 2014

In his first public interview this week, Darren Wilson, the white police officer who fatally shot an unarmed black teenager in Ferguson, Mo., was asked whether he could have done anything differently that would have prevented the killing.

His answer, broadcast on Wednesday, to the question from George Stephanopoulos of ABC News, was unequivocal: “No.”

But even as a grand jury decided this week not to indict Officer Wilson, the shooting of the 18-year-old, Michael Brown, has continued to raise questions about whether the officer handled the brief and deadly confrontation correctly. It also has become part of a broader national debate over police tactics and potential racial bias in policing.

And with the unusual release of the evidence presented to the grand jury, criminologists and experts in police procedure and tactics now have an extraordinarily detailed record with which to evaluate the shooting, which touched off riots in Ferguson and protests across the country.

To many experts, Officer Wilson’s actions in the confrontation with Mr. Brown — as he described them to the grand jury — were within the bounds of standard police protocol. Officer Wilson testified to the grand jury that the two struggled over his service weapon while he was still in his police vehicle, and that later, after a brief chase, he fired the fatal shots at Mr. Brown because the teenager was coming toward him in a threatening way.

But while the precise timeline and exact circumstances of the shooting may never be fully known, several law enforcement experts challenged Officer Wilson’s assessment that nothing could have been done to change the deadly course of his confrontation with Mr. Brown.

From the time Officer Wilson first encountered Mr. Brown walking with a friend in the middle of the street on a hot afternoon in August, to the point the teenager lay dead on the pavement, there were several opportunities to de-escalate the confrontation, said Eugene O’Donnell, a professor at John Jay College of Criminal Justice and a former New York City police officer. Mr. O’Donnell pointed in particular to the initial moments of the confrontation, when the officer and Mr. Brown are said to have struggled through the open window of the officer’s police cruiser.

“There certainly wouldn’t be a prohibition of him driving a little further along and regrouping, calling for help and thinking about nonlethal weaponry,” Mr. O’Donnell said, referring to Officer Wilson. “Just because you’re a police officer doesn’t mean you have to go into a situation headfirst.”

Officer Wilson, whose detailed, four-hour grand jury testimony was among the evidence made public this week, contends that he was caught up in a rapidly escalating confrontation that started as a routine police stop and quickly spun out of control. Mr. Brown, he said, essentially pinned him in his police cruiser, holding the door shut while punching him in the face. He said he considered an array of responses, including using pepper spray or his baton, but found them all lacking.

“The only option I thought I had was my gun,” he said, according to a transcript of his testimony.

That conclusion was confounding to Edward Davis, who retired last year as Boston police commissioner after 35 years as an officer there and in Lowell, Mass.

“There has been a significant change in the use of force by police in the 35 years I’ve been in the business — new tools like Tasers and really effective pepper sprays,” Mr. Davis said. “When you look at the whole way this situation transpired, it’s disappointing to see someone not use those intermediate tools available.”

In his testimony, Officer Wilson said that he did not have a Taser weapon with him at the time, and that he preferred not to carry one because it is large and not “very comfortable.” He said he did not use mace because it was difficult to reach and the spray could have blown back at him. His baton and flashlight, he said, were also inaccessible.

In his testimony, Officer Wilson said he never had any thought to fall back, even if only to make a tactical retreat to reassess and perhaps wait for backup officers. Part of the reason is training, experts said. In the heat of a violent altercation, police officers in many cases are trained to engage, not back down. In this case, though, human psychology may also have come into play, said Vincent E. Henry, an expert in the use of force by the police at the Homeland Security Management Institute at Long Island University.

“To back up and maybe follow him until backup arrived, in retrospect it might have been a better choice, but we don’t know that Officer Wilson saw that as a valid option,” Mr. Henry said. “Who would want to get punched in the face and then kind of say, ‘Let me just back up and follow this individual.’ A natural emotional reaction is to ratchet it up.”

In his testimony, Officer Wilson said that when he pulled his gun out, Mr. Brown reached through the window and grabbed it. That was a major escalation from which there was probably no turning back, some experts said.

“It’s a whole different ballgame,” said Fred Bealefeld, who was a Baltimore police officer for 31 years and police commissioner from 2007 to 2012. “If someone is trying to disarm a police officer or grab their weapon, that’s a felony. If someone grabs your weapon, as a cop you’re not thinking they are going to scare you with it. In my mind, every time someone tried to grab my gun in the street, they were going to try to kill me. That encounter changes everything.”

From then on, most experts said, Officer Wilson was very likely following standard police protocol in using whatever force was necessary to protect himself.

But for some experts, the shooting and the events that preceded it raised broader policy questions, particularly about how officers engage with communities they patrol. In his initial encounter with Mr. Brown and his friend in the street, Officer Wilson never exited his vehicle, voicing commands through the window of his cruiser instead.

“The notion of riding through neighborhoods yelling, ‘Get up on the curb’ or ‘Get out of the street,’ is not where you want your officers to be,” Mr. Bealefeld said. “You want them out of their cars, engaging the public and explaining to people what it is you are trying to do. Drive-by policing is not good for any community.”

In cities like Los Angeles and New York, police departments have invested huge resources into community outreach efforts, particularly in poor minority neighborhoods, with varied success. In Ferguson, where the vast majority of police officers are white and most of the residents are black, many black residents have blamed aggressive policing for creating tensions.

In September, weeks after the shooting, the Justice Department announced that it was opening a broad civil rights investigation into whether the police in Ferguson have a history of discrimination or misuse of force amid complaints of racial profiling, harassment and improper stops of black residents by police officers.

While Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. said the federal investigation offered the possibility for “wholesale change,” it could take months to complete.

In Ferguson, emotions are raw as many continue to demand punishment for Officer Wilson. But Officer Wilson, in his interview this week, said he was confident he had done nothing wrong.

“I know that I did my job right,” he said.


More than 100 Ferguson Protesters Arrested on Third Night of Demonstrations
About 200 largely peaceful demonstrators crisscrossed downtown streets for several hours Wednesday

Police arrested about 130 demonstrators Wednesday night in downtown Los Angeles after an hours-long march for a third night to protest a Missouri fatal police shooting as the LAPD again declared a citywide tactical alert.
About 200 demonstrators crisscrossed downtown streets for several hours Wednesday afternoon and evening before they were stopped by lines of riot-clad police near the Central Library.
Protesters Block 101 Freeway Lanes
Authorities declared an unlawful assembly and several dozen people are expected to be detained.
And LAPD Chief Charlie Beck said if anyone arrested ends up spending Thanksgiving locked up in jail, they only have themselves to blame.

"Well Thanksgiving is tomorrow, so it is possible. That's not our goal... they had multiple opportunities to disperse, multiple opportunities to comply with the lawful orders of police. This was not our choice." Chief Beck said.
Earlier, the demonstrators marched to a federal building and police headquarters but they were turned away from the county jail and the Staples Center arena, where the Los Angeles Lakers were playing.

"What we were trying to do was go down to the Staples Center where the game was playing so that way we would have an audience," a protester named Jerry said.
And she said she took steps to avoid being arrested when police arrived, attempting to look less like a troublemaker. "I took off my handkerchief mask and I stuck close to these guys and pretended I was an intern if anyone asked," Jerry said.

Some who were arrested complained they did not understand why, as they had been behaving peacefully, while some said getting into trouble with the law was a badge of honor.
"People have to say this cannot go on, the shooting of innocent black men, unarmed, is an absolute outrage that I am proud to be arrested resisting," protester Stephen Jaeger said.

And one mother, who spoke anonymously, told NBC4 she was devestated as her 17-year-old had been arrested on the night before Thanksgiving.
"I knew something was going to happen. She actually did come down for the rally, the protest, and she said she couldn't get out. I told her get to the back find a back way out of there. She said, 'Mom I can't they're closing everything, I can't get out," the woman said.

Legal analyst Royal Oakes believes police could be overreaching by arresting so many protesters. 
"Police could be on thin ice legally arresting them without actually witnessing a misdemeanor. Simply gathering and then failing to disperse when ordered to leave may not be enough to justify an arrest," Oakes said.

However LAPD Lt. Andy Neiman said it was a matter of public safety.
"They engaged in similar behaviors last night, they started running through the streets, endangering motorists, endangering the public out there and we are not going to tolerate that any more," Lt. Neiman said.

Nine people were arrested earlier Wednesday after they sat down in a freeway bus lane. Lanes were blocked as officers removed the protesters and an anti-police message that was scrawled on the freeway's southbound lanes near the Alvarado Street exit.
More than 200 protesters have been arrested over the past three days, mostly for disturbing the peace. One was for felony assault on a police officer and 15 were for curfew violations.

The protests follow a Missouri grand jury's decision not to indict a white police officer who shot and killed Michael Brown, an unarmed black teenager, on Aug. 9, sparking months of protests in the St. Louis suburb.
The grand jury's decision was followed by two days of protests across the country.
One of the larger gatherings Tuesday began at Leimert Park. Marchers moved through South Los Angeles and conducted a sit-in at an intersection before officers blocked passage under a freeway.
At LAPD headquarters, protesters broke off into three or four groups. Some protesters attempted to enter the 101 Freeway in downtown Los Angeles, bringing traffic to a stop. Protests grew tense late Tuesday when some people threw debris onto the freeway.
Minor vandalism was reported, including graffitti on the 101 Freeway and vandalism to a police vehicle, said LAPD Chief Charlie Beck.
"We want people to speak, but they cannot do so at the expense of others," Beck said.
An officer was injured when he was struck in the head by a frozen water bottle. The officer was not seriously injured, Beck said.


Ferguson turns to U.S. Justice Department after Michael Brown verdict
Wednesday, November 26, 2014 | Categories: Episodes 0




Share
97

Police in Ferguson, Missouri struggle to contain the community's anger -- with the police. While Ferguson may not be able to do much about getting an indictment against an officer, there is a federal law that could help overhaul the police department. (Reuters/Adrees Latif)

Listen
Long before the riots over Michael Brown's death in Ferguson there was Rodney King's 1991 beating in L.A. Four officers were caught on tape and later acquitted, triggering massive riots and a new federal law lobbied for by the Black Caucus in Congress, giving Washington the power to step in over local governments to address civil rights and other police violations in cities and counties. 

• Ferguson officer Darren Wilson's grand jury testimony: 7 revelations -- Meagan Fitzpatrick, CBC News

"It was like a 5-year-old holding on to Hulk Hogan. He was very large, very powerful man."
Darren Wilson, Ferguson Police Officer
Darren Wilson says he has a clean conscience. The white Ferguson police officer who shot unarmed black teenager Michael Brown broke his silence yesterday in an interview with ABC News chief anchor George Stephanopoulos.

The lawyer for Michael Brown's family sees things differently then Darren Wilson's account.

"We went through as much evidence as we could and saw how completely unfair this process was. We object publicly and loudly as we can on behalf of Michael Brown's family, that this process is broken."
Benjamin Crump, Attorney for Michael Brown's family
Relations between the predominantly white police force and the predominantly African-American town had been tense for some time. According to the Ferguson Police Department's own numbers, African Americans are more likely to be stopped while driving and nearly twice as likely to be searched and arrested even though they are less likely to be found with contraband.

Now, there are calls for the U.S. Federal Government to intervene... and there is a way it could be done.

Garrett Albert Duncan is an Associate Professor of Education at Washington University in St. Louis.

There is a way the U.S. Federal Government can pressure the Ferguson Police Force to change its behaviour. In 1994, in the wake of the Rodney King riots in Los Angeles, the U.S. Congress passed what's called The Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act.

Sam Walker is a Professor Emeritus of Criminal Justice at the University of Nebraska.

There are disagreements about whether the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act is the best way to address bad policing.

Bill Johnson heads the U.S.National Association of Police Organizations. He was in Alexandria, Virginia.

Of course there are police shootings and allegations of racism here in Canada too. For a sense of how those issues are handled, we were joined by Alok Mukherjee, the head of the Toronto Police Services Board.



In one classroom, a teacher makes Michael Brown the lesson of the day
Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on Google Plus Share via Email More Options
Resize Text Print Article Comments 115
By Valerie Strauss November 27  
 
Protesters rally in Los Angeles, Tuesday, Nov. 25, 2014, after the announcement that a grand jury in Missouri decided not to indict Ferguson police officer Darren Wilson in the fatal shooting of Michael Brown, an unarmed 18-year-old. (AP Photo/Nick Ut)
On Nov. 25th, a grand jury in Ferguson voted not to indict a white police officer, Darren Wilson, in the shooting of an unarmed teenager, Michael Brown, last August in a case that has stirred civil unrest and accusations of racism by white law enforcement officials. The next day, Steve Singer, a teacher in suburban Pittsburgh went to school and realized that he could not carry on as usual but that he had to address what was transpiring in Missouri. This is his account of what happened that day. Singer is a husband, father, blogger and education advocate who teaches eighth-grade Language Arts at a suburban school near Pittsburgh, Pa. He is an administrator with The Badass Teachers Association and serves on the Yinzercation Steering Committee. He gave me permission to republish this post, which first appeared on his blog, at http://www.gadflyonthewallblog.wordpress.com, where this appeared.

Singer teaches the academic, or middle-track students at his school. His classes are made up of roughly 70 percent minority students, and an even higher percentage of his students come from low socioeconomic status households. Not surprisingly, standardized test scores are low, but creativity, passion and critical thinking skills are high.  Singer says he believes in every one of his students and would do almost anything to help them succeed.

 

By Steve Singer

Michael Brown has been dead for more than 100 days, yet he was in my classroom this morning. He stared up at me from the eyes of my 22 mostly  black and brown students.

The day after it was announced that Missouri police Officer Darren Wilson would not be indicted in the shooting death of the unarmed black teen, my class was eerily quiet. There was no yelling. No singing or humming or tapping either.

No one played keep away with anyone else’s pencil or laughed about something someone had said or done the night before. No conversation about what so-and-so was wearing or arguments about the football game.

My first period class filed into the room and collapsed into their seats like they’d been up all night. Perhaps they had been. By the time the morning announcements ended and I had finished taking the 8th graders’ attendance, I had come to a decision: I had to address it. There was simply no way to ignore what we were all thinking and feeling. No way to ignore the ghost haunting our hearts and minds.

“May I ask you something?” I said turning to the class.

They just stared.

“Would you mind if we had a moment of silence for Michael Brown?”

I’ve never seen relief on so many faces all at once. It was like I had pulled a splinter from out of 22 pairs of hands with a single tug. The white teacher was going to acknowledge black pain. In here, they wouldn’t have to hide it. They could be themselves.

Some mumbled affirmatives but most had already begun memorializing. There had been silence in their hearts since last night. Silence after the rage.

How else to deal with a reality like ours? Young men of color can be gunned down in the street and our justice system rules it isn’t even worth investigating in a formal trial. The police are free to use deadly force with impunity so long as they tell a grand jury they felt threatened by their unarmed alleged assailant. And if a community can’t control its anger and frustration, it’s the oppressed people’s fault.

These are bitter pills to swallow for adults. How much harder for the young ones just starting out?

So we bowed our heads in silence.

I’ve never heard a sound quit like this emptiness. Footsteps pattered in the hall, an adult’s voice could be heard far away giving directions. But in our room you could almost hear your own heart beating. What a lonely sound, more like a rhythm than any particular note of the scale.

But as we stood there together it was somehow less lonely. All those solitary hearts beating with a single purpose. I made sure to do this in all of my classes today.

The first thing I did was make this same request: “Do you mind if we have a moment of silence for Michael Brown?”

They all agreed. In most classes this became a springboard for discussion. No grades, no lesson plans, just talk.

We talked about who Brown was and what had happened to him. We talked about the grand jury and the evidence it had considered. We talked about what their parents had told them.

And as you might expect, speaking about Brown was like a séance inviting a long line of specters into our classroom – Trayvon Martin, Eric Garner, Emmett Till, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. – fathers, brothers, classmates.

Some groups talked more than others. Some students spoke softly and with an eloquence beyond their years. Many only shook their heads.

One boy asked me, “Why does this keep happening, Mr. Singer?”

It was the question of which I had been most afraid. As a teacher, it’s always uncomfortable to admit the limits of your knowledge. But I tried to be completely honest with him.

“I really don’t know,” I said. “But let’s not forget that question. It’s a really good one.”

Every class was different. In some we spent a long time on it. In others, we moved on more quickly. But in each one, I made sure to look into their eyes – each and every one – before the moment ended.

I didn’t say it aloud, but I wanted them to know something.

We live in an uncertain world. There are people out there who will hate you just because of the color of your skin. They will hate you because of your religion or your parents or whom you love. But in this room, I want you to know you are safe, you are cherished and you are loved.

I hope they understand. For me this is not just an academic concern. It’s personal.

I have devoted my life to those children.

Some of my colleagues say that I’ve gone too far. That what happened to Michael Brown and issues of racism aren’t education issues, they aren’t things that should concern teachers.

If not, I don’t know what is.

Our society segregates public schools into black and white. It defunds the black schools, closes them and funnels the wastrels into privatized for-profit charters while leaving the best facilities and Cadillac funding for the elite and privileged.

And we allow it. Our deformed society leads to deformed citizens and a deformed parody of justice.

My room may be haunted. I teach among the ghosts of oppression. But that’s the thing about phantoms. They demand their due – honesty.

It’s all I have to give.


