Fort Lauderdale Charges 90-Year-Old, Two Pastors for Feeding Homeless
BY ELIZABETH CHUCK
Two church pastors and a 90-year-old man were charged for feeding homeless people in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, under a strict new city ordinance that virtually bans private groups from handing out food.

Despite a looming court date and the threat of being fined or jailed for violating the ordinance, the men said they plan to feed more needy later Wednesday.

Homeless activist Arnold Abbott, 90, and Christian ministers Dwayne Black of the Sanctuary Church in Fort Lauderdale and Mark Sims of St. Mary Magdalene Episcopal Church in Coral Springs were handing out meals in a park on Sunday, two days after Fort Lauderdale's ordinance took effect, when police approached them with their sirens flashing, Black said. The three were issued citations and face a $500 fine or 60 days in jail.

"This is not how our government is supposed to work," Black told NBC News. "These are people who need to be fed, and we will be feeding [again] today at 5 o'clock."

The ordinance — the fourth one that Fort Lauderdale has passed this year concerning the homeless — requires groups handing out food to homeless to be at least 500 feet away from residential properties. It limits feeding sites for homeless to one in any given city block, and prevent feeding sites from being within 500 feet of each other.

Black said the threat of police charging them again won't stop him and Abbott, who runs a non-profit organization called Feed Thy Neighbor, from handing out meals on a public beach Wednesday evening.

"As a Christian, it's pretty clear," he said. "Feed thy sheep. Take care of them."

Fort Lauderdale police said they were aware of Black and Abbott's plans, and said they had clashed with Abbott before.

"This individual was aware of the ordinance. He was warned, and when he violated the ordinance even after being warned is when he was issued the notice to appear," Fort Lauderdale Detective DeAnna Greenlaw said.

"This is not how our government is supposed to work. These are people who need to be fed."

Abbott, who Black describes as "the Mother Teresa" of community service to homeless people, successfully sued the city in 1999 for trying to stop him from feeding homeless, reported local10.com in Florida. Abbott did not immediately return phone calls from NBC News, but told local10.com he would sue again.

"These are the poorest of the poor. They have nothing. They don't have a roof over their heads. How do you turn them away?" he said.

A court date for the three men has not yet been set.

Legislative action criminalizing the distribution of food to homeless people is picking up speed across the U.S. More than 30 cities have passed or are considering such bans, with advocates arguing that allowing ministries and others to hand out meals aggravates homelessness by luring homeless people away from city-run programs.

First published November 5th 2014, 10:50 am
byline photo


[NBC News]

'Chef Arnold,' 90, Cited Again For Feeding Homeless In Florida
 AP	 | By KELLI KENNEDY
Posted: 11/06/2014 9:37 am EST Updated: 11/06/2014 4:59 pm EST FEEDING HOMELESS ARRESTED
Share
9904
Tweet
350
 
Email
58
Comment
284
Share on Google+
FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. (AP) — To Arnold Abbott, feeding the homeless in a public park in South Florida was an act of charity. To the city of Fort Lauderdale, the 90-year-old man in white chef's apron serving up gourmet-styled meals was committing a crime.

For more than two decades, the man many call "Chef Arnold" has proudly fired up his ovens to serve up four-course meals for the downtrodden who wander the palm tree-lined beaches and parks of this sunny tourist destination.

arrested feeding homeless

Now a face-off over a new ordinance restricting public feedings of the homeless has pitted Abbott and others with compassionate aims against some officials, residents and businesses who say the growing homeless population has overrun local parks and that public spaces merit greater oversight.

Abbott and two South Florida ministers were arrested last weekend as they served up food. They were charged with breaking an ordinance restricting public feeding of the homeless. Each faces up to 60 days in jail and a $500 fine.

"One of the police officers said, 'Drop that plate right now,' as if I were carrying a weapon," Abbott recalled.

feeding homeless arrested

The arrests haven't deterred Abbott, and pastors Dwayne Black and Mark Sims.

In fact, on Wednesday evening, Abbott and Black went back out for a feeding along Fort Lauderdale beach as police videotaped them serving up fresh-cooked entrees: a chicken-and-vegetable dish with broccoli sauce and a cubed ham-and-pasta dish Abbott said he topped with a "beautiful white onion celery sauce."

Nearly 100 mostly homeless people and volunteers cheered his arrival in the park.

"God bless you, Arnold!" some in the crowd shouted.

 "Thank God for Chef Arnold. I haven't eaten all day. He feeds a lot of people from the heart," said 56-year-old Eddie Hidalgo, who described himself as living on the streets since losing his job two years ago.

feeding homeless arrested

At one point, an Associated Press staffer said she watched as Abbott was called over beside a police car by officers where an officer wrote up something and handed Abbott a copy as he stood by.

Police spokeswoman DeAnna Greenlaw late told The Associated Press by email that Abbott was issued a citation on a charge of breaking the ordinance. She said no one else was cited and police had no further comment.

"I'm grateful that they allowed us to feed the people before they gave us the citation," Abbott said afterward. He has said feeding the homeless is his life's mission.

feeding homeless arrested

Fort Lauderdale is the latest U.S. city to pass restrictions on feeding homeless people in public places. Advocates for the homeless say that the cities are fighting to control increasing homeless populations but that simply passing ordinances doesn't work.

In the past two years, more than 30 cities have tried to introduce laws similar to Fort Lauderdale's, according to the National Coalition for the Homeless. The efforts come as more veterans face homelessness and after two harsh winters drove homeless people southward, especially to Florida.

Mayor Jack Seiler said he thinks Abbott and the two pastors have good intentions, but that the city can't discriminate in enforcing the ordinance. He said it was passed recently to ensure that public places are open to everyone and stressed that the city was working with local charities to help with the root causes of homelessness.

"The parks have just been overrun and were inaccessible to locals and businesses," Seiler said.  

Black, a local pastor, noted that the ordinance passed after a long meeting after midnight, when many people had gone home. But he said he's willing to stand up to the measure, even at the risk of arrest.

Fort Lauderdale's ordinance took effect Friday, and the city passed a slew of other laws addressing homelessness in recent months. They ban people from leaving their belongings unattended, outlaw panhandling at medians, and strengthen defecation and urination laws, according to Michael Stoops, director of community organizing for the National Coalition for the Homeless.

"I think cities have grown tired of the homeless situation, and businesses and residents complain about the homeless population," Stoops said, citing the conflict between business needs and the needs of the homeless.

Fort Lauderdale police have said that the men were not taken into custody last weekend and that they were given notices to appear in court from that encounter, adding the matter will ultimately be decided by a judge. The police spokeswoman Greenlaw said those charged "were well aware of the changes to the ordinance and its effective date."

Other cities are conducting routine homeless sweeps while some have launched anti-panhandling campaigns, according to the coalition. And many laws continue to target public feedings.

In Houston, groups need written consent to feed the homeless in public, or they face a $2,000 fine. Organizations in Columbia, South Carolina, must pay $150 for a permit more than two weeks in advance to feed the homeless in city parks.

In Orlando, an ordinance requires groups to get a permit to feed 25 or more people in parks in a downtown district. Groups are limited to two permits per year for each park. Since then, numerous activists have been arrested for violating the law. The arrests have drawn national attention, with some focusing on the contrast between the vacation destination of the Orlando area and the poverty in some surrounding areas.

[Huffington]

90-Year-Old Man Arrested In Florida For Feeding The Homeless
BY SCOTT KEYES POSTED ON NOVEMBER 6, 2014 AT 8:16 AM UPDATED: NOVEMBER 7, 2014 AT 1:56 PM
 14,896Share This   2,696Tweet This "90-Year-Old Man Arrested In Florida For Feeding The Homeless" Share:  facebook icon  twitter icon
Arnold Abbott, 90, arrested for feeding the homeless
Arnold Abbott, 90, arrested for feeding the homeless
CREDIT: MEGAHOBORIFFIC YOUTUBE PAGE
There are a lot of strange local ordinances in this country. But perhaps none are stranger than the one that resulted in the arrest of a nonagenarian for giving food to hungry people.
Last month, Ft. Lauderdale city officials passed a new measure to crack down on people feeding the homeless. On Sunday, two days after the new law went into effect, Arnold Abbott, 90, a longtime advocate for the homeless and regular volunteer at a local soup kitchen, was arrested for the crime of giving food to the needy. He now faces up to 60 days in jail and a $500 fine. Two local pastors were also arrested and face the same potential sentences.
Watch Abbott’s arrest:

According to a census last year, there are 2,810 homeless individuals and families who live in Broward County, most of whom reside in Ft. Lauderdale.
Now, Abbott has been put in the unusual position of having to defend his charity work. In an interview with Local 10, he recounted the experience. “One of the police officers said, ‘Drop that plate right now,’ as if I were carrying a weapon,” said Abbott.
Local 10 also spoke with Mayor Jack Seiler, who justified the city’s actions: “We enforce the laws here in Ft. Lauderdale.”
Indeed, Ft. Lauderdale has been enforcing a number of new ordinances intended to criminalize homelessness. In April, the city moved to make it illegal for homeless people to have possessions in public, allowing police officers to confiscate any personal possessions they find after 24 hours. Unsatisfied, the city took its anti-homeless crackdown a step further in September, making it illegal to sleep in public.
For his part, Abbott said he will fight the charges and hopes to overturn the anti-charity ordinance. “I fully believe that I am my brother’s keeper,” he told Local 10. “These are the poorest of the poor, they have nothing, they don’t have a roof over their heads. How do you turn them away?”

[Think Progress]

90-year-old, minister arrested for feeding the homeless
Posted: Nov 04, 2014 6:43 AM MST
Updated: Nov 04, 2014 6:43 AM MST
By CNN Pathfire
 

Most Viewed Stories
SC woman dies in crash, man charged with DUI
White SC policeman charged in 2011 shooting of unarmed black man
Girlfriend charged in Florence man's murder
Family seeks justice for triple homicide victim, as Robeson County's violent crime rate grows
26-year veteran of Myrtle Beach Fire dies while on duty
Florence County teen charged with armed robbery
  
MORE>>
Ft. Lauderdale, FL - It did not take long for city of Fort Lauderdale to make good on the promise to criminally charge those who violate a new ordinance that effectively outlaws groups from feeding the homeless in public. 

On Sunday the city charged three people, including two ministers and a 90-year-old homeless advocate, and they could face up to 60 days in jail for their so-called crime. 

Arnold Abbott said, "I fully believe that I am my brother's keeper. Love they neighbor as thy self."

90-year-old Abbott prepares hundreds of meals each week for the homeless in the kitchen of the Sanctuary Church. 

But Abbott's work now has him in trouble with the law. 

He faces possible jail time and a $500 fine for feeding the homeless after he was charged Sunday with violating a new ordinance that virtually outlaws groups from sharing food with the hungry in the city. 

He said, "One of police officers came over and said 'Drop that plate right now,' as if I was carrying a weapon. "

Also charged was a minister from Coral Springs and Sanctuary Church Pastor, Wayne Black. "We believe very strongly that Jesus taught us that we are to feed his sheep."

Mayor Jack Seiler warned arrests were coming. He said, "We enforce the laws here in Ft Lauderdale."

Back in 1999, Abbott sued the city for banning him from feeding homeless on beach, a lawsuit he won. 

Abbott said he is willing to go to court again. 

Abbott plans to be out there Wednesday to serve those in need again and said although he doesn't want to get arrested he is prepared for the possibility. 

[WBTW]

90-year-old among first charged under Fort Lauderdale's strict rules against feeding homeless
Published November 04, 2014FoxNews.com
Facebook15145 Twitter950 livefyre1976 Email Print
Abbottpic1.jpg
Arnold Abbott plans to defy Fort Lauderdale's ordinance against feeding the homeless again on Wednesday. (Courtesy: Sun-Sentinel)
Fort Lauderdale police say Arnold Abbott violated a new city law, but the 90-year-old homeless advocate says his only crime was to “love thy neighbor.”

Abbott was charged Sunday along with two local pastors with violating the city’s new ordinance that effectively bans giving out food in public. He faces 60 days in jail and a $500 fine, and he intends to get cited again Wednesday night, when he sets out to feed some of the Florida city’s estimated 10,000 homeless on a public beach.

“The homeless people come here for the weather. They know they won’t freeze to death in Fort Lauderdale.”
- Arnold Abbott, homeless advocate
“I know that I will be arrested again, and I am prepared for that,” Abbott said by phone from his office at Love Thy Neighbor, Inc., a nonprofit he established in honor of his wife, Maureen, after her death in a car accident 23 years ago. “I am my brother’s keeper, and what they are doing is just heartless.”

Fort Lauderdale passed an ordinance late last month that included a slate of new regulations on where and how groups can provide food to homeless people.  The vote made the city the 13th in the nation since 2012 to pass restrictions on where people can feed the homeless, according to a report by the National Coalition for the Homeless.

The regulations enacted in Fort Lauderdale state that no two indoor feeding sites can be within 500 feet of one another or on the same block; outdoor feeding programs require a permit or permission of the property owner and must provide portable toilets; and outdoor stations cannot be within 500 feet of residential properties.

Abbott, whose charity has battled city officials for years in court and on the streets of the southern Florida city, said the toilet requirement was too much for his group.

“I have tried to abide by their regulations, but we just are not able to provide a port-a-potty,” he said. “I believe that is the job of the municipality, anyway.”

Cited along with Abbott were Dwayne Black, pastor of The Sanctuary Church in Fort Lauderdale, and Mark Sims of St. Mary Magdalene Episcopal Church in Coral Springs, according to the Fort Lauderdale Sun-Sentinel. Although the three were not handcuffed or taken to jail, they were cited and must appear in court or face a bench warrant.

Fort Lauderdale officials defended the ordinance, saying it does not bar people from helping the hungry.

"The ordinance allows for legal, clean and safe distribution of food to the homeless," said Fort Lauderdale Police Department Det. DeAnna Greenlaw. "For example, if a minister, priest or member of clergy wishes to provide food to the homeless at their establishment (I.e community hall, church or gathering place) they can do so if the proper facilities, as listed in the ordinance, are in place."



Supporters of the strict laws say that allowing programs like Abbott’s encourages homelessness. Cal Deal, a 65-year-old former journalist who videotapes homeless people in the city and says they commit crimes, cause sanitation problems and need more help than simply food.

"The people feeding them are enablers, and they enable the homeless by making their lives easier," Deal told the New Times of Broward County. "Hunger is a big motivator. Are people more likely to seek help when they're hungry or when they're fed and happy?"

Ron Book, chairman of the Miami-Dade County Homeless Trust, told city lawmakers at the raucous, Oct. 21 meeting at which the new laws were passed that they would have a positive effect.

"Feeding people on the streets is sanctioning homelessness," Book said. "Whatever discourages feeding people on the streets is a positive thing."

Sims acknowledged that Fort Lauderdale has a problem with homelessness, but said the answer isn't laws that make it hard to feed people.

"It's not an easy issue, not cut and dried," Sims said. "But what is cut and dried is that people deserve to eat when they are hungry. And people of faith are compelled to reach out to people who are in need.

"We need to work harder to solve the problem, rather than just shutting it down,” he added.

Abbott said there is a simple explanation for Fort Lauderdale's outsize homeless population.

“The homeless people come here for the weather,” he said. “They know they won’t freeze to death in Fort Lauderdale.”

Abbott, a World War II veteran who won two Purple Hearts as an infantryman, said he won’t stop the fight he has dedicated to his wife.

“She tried to help as many poor and homeless people as she could,” said Abbott, a retired jewelry salesman who grew up in Philadelphia. “When I lost her, I decided the best tribute to her would be a full-time program in her name.”

In addition to feeding the homeless, Love Thy Neighbor operates a culinary training program that Abbott says has helped more than 400 people learn food service skills.

But the food programs have gotten him in trouble for years. In 1999, the city tried to stop Abbott from feeding the homeless on Fort Lauderdale Beach, the same location he plans to go to Wednesday. Abbott sued and won, and says he will go back to court if necessary.

"I’ll go to court again and sue the city," said Abbott. "They are doing the bidding of the very wealthy, and they are trying to sweep the poorest of the poor under the rug.”

[fox news]

'Drop that plate right now': Florida charity worker, 90, is arrested for FEEDING the homeless under new law against sharing food publicly (which presumably includes loaves and fishes)
Arnold Abbott has fed homeless people since 1991 with a team of volunteers
He now says he intends to take the City of Fort Lauderdale to court
By JAMES GORDON
PUBLISHED: 23:53 GMT, 4 November 2014 | UPDATED: 19:07 GMT, 6 November 2014
     
10k
shares
494
View comments
A 90-year-old man could be going to jail for up to 60 days after feeding homeless people and breaking a new law in Fort Lauderdale that bans people from sharing their meals with members of the public. 
Arnold Abbott is likely to face a $500 fine and could be sentenced to spending up to two months behind bars after police officers arrested him on Sunday as he was handing out meals to homeless people in a park .
He was arrested and charged along with two ministers from the Sanctuary Church, which prepares hundreds of meals to dish out every week in their kitchen.
Scroll down for video 
Arrested: Arnold Abbott, 90, has been feeding the homeless in Fort Lauderdale for more than 20 years but was arrested after feeding homeless people in park in the city after a new law came into effect banning the practice
+6
Arrested: Arnold Abbott, 90, has been feeding the homeless in Fort Lauderdale for more than 20 years but was arrested after feeding homeless people in park in the city after a new law came into effect banning the practice
Hands off that plate! Officers demanded that Mr Abbott stop feeding the homeless people at once
+6
Hands off that plate! Officers demanded that Mr Abbott stop feeding the homeless people at once
Hard to swallow: All three men face up to 60 days in jail and a $500 fine
+6
Hard to swallow: All three men face up to 60 days in jail and a $500 fine
90-year-old man cited for feeding the homeless in FL

Onlookers were outraged and shouted 'shame on you!' to officers.
At one point an officers yelled at Mr Abbott to 'drop that plate right now!' as if it were a loaded weapon.
'These are the poorest of the poor, they have nothing, they don't have a roof over their heads. How do you turn them away?'
RELATED ARTICLES
Previous
1
Next

'You've ruined my life!' Devastated kids sob after their...

High school student, 17, 'shot and stabbed elderly man to...
SHARE THIS ARTICLE
Share
'I don't do things to purposefully aggravate the situation,' said Mr Abbott to NBC News, 'I'm trying to work with the city. Any human has the right to help his fellow man.' 
The issue of feeding the homeless has cropped up multiple times during Mr Abbots long life.
In 1999 he sued the City of Fort Lauderdale after he was banned from feeding the homeless on the beach.
Familiar fight: In 1999, the city tried to stop Abbott from feeding the homeless on Fort Lauderdale Beach, prompting a lawsuit, which he won. Now he said he will fight the new law and take the city back to court
+6
Familiar fight: In 1999, the city tried to stop Abbott from feeding the homeless on Fort Lauderdale Beach, prompting a lawsuit, which he won. Now he said he will fight the new law and take the city back to court
We will eat! Abbott said he won't turn homeless people away and is planning to bring food to the beach this Wednesday evening with the expectation that he may be hit with another charge
+6
We will eat! Abbott said he won't turn homeless people away and is planning to bring food to the beach this Wednesday evening with the expectation that he may be hit with another charge
A court ruled that such a law was against the Constitution. 
This new law which came into effect last week and is also being looked at by other cities including Seattle, Los Angeles, Phoenix, Dallas, and Philadelphia. 
Undeterred Mr Abbott, says he in planning to sue the city once again and intends to continue his kind-hearted deeds.
The new regulations require groups to be at least 500 feet away from residential properties and food sites are restricted to one per city block, but charities have criticized the rules as forms of implementing social cleansing.
Michael Stoops, community organised at the National Coalition for the Homeless, told NBC News: 'Economic development and tourism don't mesh well with homeless folks and the agencies that serve them.' 
Partners in crime: Also cited were two Christian ministers -- Dwayne Black, pastor of The Sanctuary Church in Fort Lauderdale, and Mark Sims of St. Mary Magdalene Episcopal Church in Coral Springs
+6
Partners in crime: Also cited were two Christian ministers -- Dwayne Black, pastor of The Sanctuary Church in Fort Lauderdale, and Mark Sims of St. Mary Magdalene Episcopal Church in Coral Springs


Read more: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2821129/90-year-old-man-arrested-feeding-homeless-Fort-Lauderdale-new-law-introduced-bans-people-sharing-food-public.html#ixzz3KyNmkd4o 
Follow us: @MailOnline on Twitter | DailyMail on Facebook

[Daily Mail]

'As long as there is breath in my body': Determined 90-year-old Florida man vows to keep feeding homeless despite arrests
Arnold Abbott avoided the wrath of Fort Lauderdale cops on Sunday by feeding the homeless indoors, at a church. A new city ordinance forbids anyone from feeding the homeless in public. The week before, Abbott was busted twice for feeding the needy at a nearby park.
BY DAVID BOROFF    NEW YORK DAILY NEWS Monday, November 10, 2014, 10:46 AM A A A
1K
68
13
SHARE THIS URL

Arnold Abbott, 90, locked horns with Fort Lauderdale Mayor Jack Seiler on TV on Sunday.
WPLG
Arnold Abbott, 90, locked horns with Fort Lauderdale Mayor Jack Seiler on TV on Sunday.
"As long as there is breath in my body."

The determined 90-year-old Florida activist who was busted twice for feeding the homeless vowed Sunday to continue his efforts despite a possible jail sentence.

"We will continue as long as there is breath in my body," Arnold Abbott told the Sun-Sentinel.

Abbott avoided the wrath of cops on Sunday by feeding the homeless indoors, at a local church in Fort Lauderdale. A new city ordinance forbids anyone from feeding the homeless in public.

Arnold Abbott has been arrested twice for feeding the homeless.Arnold Abbott has been arrested twice for feeding the homeless.PreviousNextA 90-Year-Old and Two Clergymen Cited, Face Possible Jail Time, for Feeding the Homeless in Fort Lauderdale  Arnold P. Abbott (C), of Maureen A. Abbott Love Thy Neighbor Fund, Inc. and Culinary Skills Training Program, organizations that feed and educate the homeless, is seen on the serving line in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, November 9, 2014. Abbott, who was cited this week for feeding homeless people in public on Fort Lauderdale Beach, moved his feeding for one day only, to a local church, which is private property. REUTERS/Andrew Innerarity (UNITED STATES - Tags: POLITICS SOCIETY POVERTY HEADSHOT)  A 90-Year-Old and Two Clergymen Cited, Face Possible Jail Time, for Feeding the Homeless in Fort Lauderdale  Fort Lauderdale police officers are seen with homeless people in downtown Fort Lauderdale, November 9, 2014. Recent legislations in Fort Lauderdale, which severely limited whether homeless people can be fed in public, affected Arnold P. Abbott, President of the Maureen A. Abbott Love Thy Neighbor Fund, Inc. and Culinary Skills Training Program, which feeds and educates the homeless. REUTERS/Andrew Innerarity (UNITED STATES - Tags: POLITICS SOCIETY POVERTY)  Arnold P. Abbott informs people at his usual feeding site in front of the main county library downtown, he would be relocating the feeding today only, to a nearby church, Fort Lauderdale, Florida November 9, 2014. Abbott, the President of the Maureen A. Abbott Love Thy Neighbor Fund, Inc. and Culinary Skills Training Program, organizations that feed and educate the homeless, was cited this week for feeding homeless people in public on Fort Lauderdale Beach.  REUTERS/Andrew Innerarity (UNITED STATES - Tags: POLITICS SOCIETY POVERTY) Enlarge
NEW BROWARD PALM BREACH VIA VIMEO
The week before, Abbott was busted on two different occasions for feeding the needy at Stranahan Park, just a few blocks from where he was Sunday.

"What Arnold's doing is actually a very kind and compassionate act," Mayor Jack Seiler said during a face-off with Abbott on a local TV station on Sunday. "We are just simply asking him to do it in a proper location."

"We have tried many, many times to find indoor locations to feed the homeless and they have not been available to us," Abbott responded. "If you can find locations like that, I am not married to Stranahan Park."


Homeless advocate faces Fort Lauderdale mayor
WPTV - West Palm, FL

The mayor also admitted making a mistake, saying "we were wrong in not getting the word out sooner. And in fairness to Arnold, we should have sat down with him ... making sure that he was on board. But obviously that message got lost."

On Friday, three members of a group called Food Not Bombs were busted for helping out the homeless at the park, according to the Sun-Sentinel.

"As Martin Luther King Jr., said, our responsibility is to disobey unjust laws," 25-year-old Nikki Rye, one of the three who was arrested, told the Sun-Sentinel. "These actions violate basic human rights."

[NY Daily News]
