Bundle Up: It's Freezing or Below in All 50 States
United States of Brrr!

Few people were on Dania Beach, Fla., Tuesday, Nov. 18, 2014, as a cold front moved into the southern part of the state. While that pre-winter cold weather system broke temperature records and dumped up to foot and a half of snow in the northern part of the country, over night temperatures will drop in the mid 50's, with strong winds and rain.
Few people were on Dania Beach, Fla., on Tuesdayas a cold front moved into the southern part of the state.  


Associated Press Nov. 18, 2014 | 5:16 p.m. EST + More

NEW YORK (AP) — Baby, it's cold outside, no matter what part of the United States you're in.

Temperatures fell to freezing or below at recording stations in all 50 states on Tuesday morning, from the highest elevations in the mountains of Hawaii to the snow-paralyzed Buffalo area in New York.

Jeff Masters is meteorology director at the online site Weather Underground. He says the low temperatures are January-like instead of what's normal for November. He says it's 15 degrees to 35 degrees below average over a big chunk of the country, thanks to some arctic air.

Masters says the weather should start moderating back to what's normal for this time of year by the end of the week.

Copyright 2014 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

[US NEWS]

All 50 U.S. states feel freezing temperatures, four dead in New York
BY LAILA KEARNEY
NEW YORK Wed Nov 19, 2014 4:58am EST

inShare
47
Share this

Email
Print

A woman scrapes ice from her car's windshield in the parking lot of a grocery store in Minneapolis, November 10, 2014. REUTERS-Eric Miller
1 OF 5. A woman scrapes ice from her car's windshield in the parking lot of a grocery store in Minneapolis, November 10, 2014.
CREDIT: REUTERS/ERIC MILLER
RELATED NEWS
All 50 U.S. states feeling freezing temperatures
Cold sweeping south, northern Great Lakes hit by early heavy snow
Winter storm hits U.S. Plains, upper Midwest; cold to follow
RELATED TOPICS
U.S. »
Environment »
(Reuters) - Temperatures in all 50 U.S. states dipped to freezing or below on Tuesday as an unseasonably cold blast of weather moved across the country while heavy snow prompted a state of emergency in western New York and contributed to the deaths of four people.

Every U.S. state, including Hawaii, was bitten by temperatures at the freezing point of 32 degrees F (0 C) or below, the National Weather Service (NWS) said.

It was the coldest November morning across the country since 1976, according to Weather Bell Analytics, a meteorologist consulting firm. Typically, such cold is not seen until late December through February, the NWS said.

Parts of Erie County, western New York, had 60 inches (1.5 m) of snow, with more falling, said Steven Welch of the National Weather Service near Buffalo.

County officials said on Tuesday there had been four storm-related deaths. One person was killed in a traffic accident and three others died after suffering heart problems, two of whom were believed to have been shoveling heavy snow at the time.

Snow fell at a rate of up to five inches (13 cm) an hour and some areas approached the U.S. record for 24-hour snowfall totals of 76 inches (193 cm), the NWS said.

New York Governor Andrew Cuomo declared a state of emergency for 10 counties. National Guard troops were deployed to help residents cope with the storm.

A total of three to four feet (0.9 to 1.2 meters) of snow was expected in many areas of western New York and as much as six feet (1.8 meters) elsewhere, the NWS said.

A 140-mile (225-km) stretch of the New York State Thruway along Lake Erie and Lake Ontario was closed. Bans on driving were implemented in some places.

A bus carrying the Niagara University women's basketball team has been stuck on the Thruway since 2 a.m., the school said.

In the south of the United States, states were bracing for a record chill from the Arctic-born cold that swept the Rocky Mountains last week.

In Florida, freezing temperatures were expected through Wednesday morning, the NWS said.

"I can't stand it," said Robin Roy, 53, shivering underneath a rainbow-colored poncho at an outdoor market in Gulfport, Florida. "I've never liked the cold."

(Additional reporting by Letitia Stein in Gulfport, Fla., Brendan O'Brien in Milwaukee, Ellen Wulfhorst in New York and Curtis Skinner in San Francisco; Editing by Gareth Jones)

[REUTERS]

Analysis: Coldest November morning in U.S. since 1976; all 50 states freeze
Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on Google Plus Share via Email More Options
Resize Text Print Article Comments 55
By Jason Samenow November 18  
 
U.S. temperatures at 7 a.m. from RTMA (WeatherBell.com)
The Lower 48 shivered this morning in a November cold snap unrivaled in several decades.  The average temperature over the contiguous U.S. fell to a frigid 19.4 degrees F. at 7 a.m. according to a dataset used by forecasters.

All 50 U.S. states, including Hawaii, recorded a low temperature at or below 32 degrees.


 

WeatherBell Analytics meteorologist Ryan Maue found that this morning’s 19.4F estimate for the Lower 48 was the coldest reading since November 30, 1976, when the mercury dipped to 17.8 F. The data record dates back to 1955.

(The 19.4F estimate comes from the Real-Time Mesoscale Analysis, a dataset from the National Weather Service that incorporates local temperature readings as well as model estimates in areas where data coverage is sparse.)

Roughly 85 percent of the Lower 48 was below freezing this morning, according to the data.


A lake effect snowstorm led to heavy snowfall in upstate New York on Monday night. Social video captured the scene Tuesday morning with dogs and people playing in the snow. (Divya Jeswani Verma/The Washington Post)
Scores of record lows and cold weather milestones were (or are forecast to be) established across the U.S. – from Idaho to Atlanta today. Several examples:

Atlanta is forecast to have its coldest November afternoon since 1940
State College, Pa. dipped to 14 F, its earliest excursion into the teens since 1997
Joplin, Mo. set a record low for November, dropping to 6 degrees.
Detroit tied a record low for November 18 of 11 degrees (records there date back to 1880)
Houston had its earliest fall freeze since 1999
Mount Mitchell, N.C. dropped to 0 degrees.
Kansas City, Mo. set a record low for the date of 6 degrees, shattering the old record of 14 from 1903
Boise, Idaho set a record low of 5 degrees this morning
Record low temperatures were broken at Paducah, Ky, Evansville, Ind., and Cape Girardeau, Mo. of 10, 9, and 8 respectively
 
Temperature near or best record lows at 7 a.m. (CoolWx.com)
For a second straight day, 50 percent of the Lower 48 was covered in snow, the most in the relatively short record (dating back to 2003).

Related: 50 percent of Lower 48 covered in snow, most this early in more than a decade | Buffalo, N.Y. area in the midst of a truly insane lake effect snow storm

The historic November cold shot reflects an extreme jet stream pattern channeling Arctic air directly into the Lower 48 states. Although the contiguous U.S. is in the deep freeze, on the flip-side of the jet stream see-saw, mild air is streaming into Alaska.

 Visualization of GFS representation of flow pattern Tuesday morning (Laris Karklis, The Washington Post)
Visualization of GFS representation of flow pattern Tuesday morning (Laris Karklis, The Washington Post)
Incredibly, the average temperature of the Lower 48 this morning was about the same as Barrow, Alaska, the Last Frontier’s northernmost town, where the mercury varied between 15 and 20 degrees.

Lest anyone believe today’s cold in the Lower 48 refutes global warming, consider the Northern Hemisphere, overall, is warmer than normal – some 1.35 F degrees above the 1979-2000 baseline.

 
Image obtained using Climate Reanalyzer, Climate Change Institute, University of Maine, USA.
(Not to mention, we just posted several data centers found it was the warmest October on record globally.)

[Washington Post]


All 50 states recorded freezing temperatures overnight
Freezing temperatures
A graphic from the National Weather Service depicts sub-freezing temperatures measured across the entire continental United States. (National Weather Service Twin Cities)
By Scott Dance,
The Baltimore Sun
contact the reporter Weather ReportsWeather WarningsNational Weather Service
It's not just cold here. Freezing temperatures recorded in all 50 states, and snow covers half the country.
Snow covers half of the country, and freezing temperatures extend to the Gulf coast.
Weather stations in all 50 states -- even Hawaii -- reported observations of freezing temperatures overnight as wintry cold spreads across North America.

The National Weather Service's Twin Cities forecast office in Minnesota noted the occurrence in a tweet this morning, with a map showing sub-freezing temperatures extending across nearly the entire continental United States.

 Why this cold IS NOT the Polar Vortex!
Meteorologist Ari Sarsalari explains what the polar vortex is, and why the recent blast of cold is not the polar vortex.
Wintry weather warnings extend across the Lower 48, from lake effect snow warnings around the Great Lakes to hard freeze warnings across northern Florida and southern Georgia, Alabama and Mississippi, according to the weather service.

Snow cover extends over slightly more than half of the country, compared with 12 percent at this time last year, according to the weather service.

While Hawaii is not being affected by the same cold snap, it did record freezing temperatures overnight atop Mauna Kea, a 13,800 foot dormant volcano on the island of Hawaii.

lRelated Expect chilly, windy weather Tuesday and Wednesday
MARYLAND WEATHER
Expect chilly, windy weather Tuesday and Wednesday
SEE ALL RELATED	
8
The overall outlook across the country is frigid and bleak, according to a weather service forecast discussion:

"A deep low pressure system centered over southeastern Canada will continue to push polar air over the eastern half of the US this week. Well below average temperatures will reach the Gulf Coast, with most of the Mid-Atlantic states barely getting above freezing Tuesday and Wednesday. In the Midwest, periods of lake effect snow will continue south and east of the Great Lakes through Wednesday."

cComments
@Huvabruva, don't buy into that librul round earth scam, it's all a ploy to hand control to a one world government. Gruber!
HARRYBSUN
AT 9:45 AM NOVEMBER 19, 2014
ADD A COMMENTSEE ALL COMMENTS	
7
But local forecasting website Foot's Forecast was careful to note, it's not exactly accurate to blame this cold snap on the "polar vortex", a swirling column of frigid air that usually stays over the Arctic. The vortex itself remains over northern Canada, though it is still far enough south to push the abnormally cold air over the country, according to a post on Foot's Facebook page.

[Baltimore Sun]

United States Hit By Freezing Temperatures, Western New York Covered In Six Feet Of Snow
The Huffington Post UK	 | By Paul Vale
Email
Posted: 19/11/2014 15:51 GMT Updated: 19/11/2014 16:59 GMT

Share
412
Tweet
40
 
Email
22
Comment
40
Share on Google+
NEW YORK -- The United States has been plunged into an unseasonal freeze, with temperatures up to 15 degrees lower than average for mid-November. Some areas of New York State, on the country’s eastern coast, have suffered more than six feet of snow, with Buffalo, NY, experiencing 60-inches on Tuesday. The snowfall has been accompanied by wind gusts up to 40 mph and visibility near zero.

The weather has led to seven deaths, with freezing temperatures of around -5 degrees hitting New York City, Philadelphia and Washington DC. Much of the Midwest is also suffering from the icy blast; even in the south cities, such as Atlanta, Houston and New Orleans, are experiencing an unusual freeze.

According to meteorologists, the entire mainland US plunged to around freezing on Tuesday, with the snap expected to continue until the end of the week. The weather has left many people trapped in their cars, with state troopers and members of the National Guard deployed to rescue around 150 people across different states.

New York Governor Andrew Cuomo said in a statement on Tuesday: "Travel bans and advisories remain in effect, and I urge drivers to stay off the roads so that our state agencies and the National Guard can assist those that need help".

Speaking to AP, Linda Oakley of Buffalo, said:"We have tried to get out of our house, and we are lucky to be able to shovel so we can open the door. Basically, that's it, open the door." She added: "We're just thinking that in case of an emergency we can at least get out the door. We can't go any further. All around us, it's a solid four feet of snow that is so thick and so heavy you can hardly move it with a shovel."


ASSOCIATED PRESS
A band of storm clouds moves across Lake Erie and into Buffalo, N.Y., Tuesday, Nov. 18, 2014. Parts of New York measured the season's first big snowfall in feet, rather than inches, on Tuesday as 3 feet of lake-effect snow blanketed the Buffalo area and forced the closure of a 132-mile stretch of the state Thruway.

ASSOCIATED PRESS
A New York State Snowgrader moves snow on Broadway in Lancaster, N.Y. Wednesday, Nov. 19, 2014. A ferocious storm dumped massive piles of snow on parts of upstate New York, trapping residents in their homes and stranding motorists on roadways, as temperatures in all 50 states fell to freezing or below.

ASSOCIATED PRESS
Snow covers a street at daybreak Wednesday, Nov. 19, 2014, in south Buffalo, N.Y. Buffalo-area officials are getting help from a neighboring county in their efforts to clear roads and provide emergency services during the snowstorm that has buried sections of western New York in more than 5 feet of snow.

ASSOCIATED PRESS
This driver climbs a snowbank to get to a gas at a station in Lancaster, N.Y. Wednesday, Nov. 19, 2014. A ferocious storm dumped massive piles of snow on parts of upstate New York, trapping residents in their homes and stranding motorists on roadways, as temperatures in all 50 states fell to freezing or below.

ASSOCIATED PRESS
A New York State snowblower removes snow on Broadway in Lancaster, N.Y. Wednesday, Nov. 19, 2014. A ferocious storm dumped massive piles of snow on parts of upstate New York, trapping residents in their homes and stranding motorists on roadways, as temperatures in all 50 states fell to freezing or below.


ASSOCIATED PRESS
Cars with snow atop the roofs sit idle at this home on Broadway in Lancaster, N.Y. Wednesday, Nov. 19, 2014. A ferocious storm dumped massive piles of snow on parts of upstate New York, trapping residents in their homes and stranding motorists on roadways, as temperatures in all 50 states fell to freezing or below.

ASSOCIATED PRESS
Lake-effect snow storm with freezing temperatures affected travel, like this plane that negotiated its way through the snow at Buffalo Greater International Airport, in Buffalo, N.Y. Tuesday, Nov. 18, 2014. Temperatures fell to freezing or below at recording stations in all 50 states on Tuesday morning, from the highest elevations in the mountains of Hawaii to the snow-paralyzed Buffalo area in New York.

ASSOCIATED PRESS
A house is obscured by wind-blown, lake-effect snow on Tuesday, Nov. 18, 2014 in Buffalo, N.Y. Parts of New York measured the season's first big snowfall in feet, rather than inches, as 3 feet of lake-effect snow blanketed the Buffalo area. The Thruway Authority said white-out conditions caused by wind gusts of more than 30 mph forced the closure of Interstate 90 in both directions from the Rochester area to Ripley, on the Pennsylvania border 60 miles southwest of Buffalo.

ASSOCIATED PRESS
A band of storm clouds moves across Lake Erie and into Buffalo, N.Y., Tuesday, Nov. 18, 2014. Parts of New York measured the season's first big snowfall in feet, rather than inches, on Tuesday as 3 feet of lake-effect snow blanketed the Buffalo area and forced the closure of a 132-mile stretch of the state Thruway.

ASSOCIATED PRESS
Heavy snow covers the street on Tuesday, Nov. 18, 2014 in Buffalo, N.Y., Parts of New York are measuring the season's first big snowfall in feet, rather than inches, as nearly 3 feet blanketed the Buffalo area Tuesday, forcing the closure of a 105-mile stretch of the state Thruway. The National Weather Service says a foot to almost 3 feet of snow has fallen on areas south and east of the city.

Carolyn Thompson/AP
Snow covers a street at daybreak Wednesday, Nov. 19, 2014, in south Buffalo, N.Y. Buffalo-area officials are getting help from a neighboring county in their efforts to clear roads and provide emergency services during the snowstorm that has buried sections of western New York in more than 5 feet of snow.

Gary Wiepert/AP
A lake-effect wall of snow storm travels across Lake Erie into Buffalo, N.Y. Tuesday, Nov. 18, 2014. Several feet of lake-effect snow paralyzed the Buffalo area Tuesday, forcing state troopers to deliver blankets and other supplies to motorists stranded on the New York State Thruway and adding an ominous note to a wintry season that's already snarling travel and numbing fingers from the Midwest to the Carolinas.

Carolyn Thompson/AP
A 4-foot fence and SUV are nearly buried along a street in Buffalo, N.Y. on Tuesday, Nov. 18, 2014. Parts of New York measured the season's first big snowfall in feet, rather than inches, as 3 feet of lake-effect snow blanketed the Buffalo area. The Thruway Authority said white-out conditions caused by wind gusts of more than 30 mph forced the closure of Interstate 90 in both directions from the Rochester area to Ripley, on the Pennsylvania border 60 miles southwest of Buffalo.

Carolyn Thompson/AP
Heavy snow covers the street on Tuesday, Nov. 18, 2014 in Buffalo, N.Y., Parts of New York are measuring the season's first big snowfall in feet, rather than inches, as nearly 3 feet blanketed the Buffalo area Tuesday, forcing the closure of a 105-mile stretch of the state Thruway. The National Weather Service says a foot to almost 3 feet of snow has fallen on areas south and east of the city.

Carolyn Thompson/AP
Heavy snow covers the street on Tuesday, Nov. 18, 2014 in Buffalo, N.Y., Parts of New York are measuring the season's first big snowfall in feet, rather than inches, as nearly 3 feet blanketed the Buffalo area Tuesday, forcing the closure of a 105-mile stretch of the state Thruway. The National Weather Service says a foot to almost 3 feet of snow has fallen on areas south and east of the city.

[Huffington Post]]
