Jerusalem terror attack 'strikes at soul' of Jews worldwide
By Daniel Burke, CNN
updated 9:24 PM EST, Tue November 18, 2014

Your video will begin momentarily.
STORY HIGHLIGHTS
Killing of rabbis strikes at soul of Jews around the world, Jewish leaders say
In the U.S., the horror of the attack unifies Jews across the political spectrum
Something especially heinous about killing people while they pray, leaders say
Muslims also condemn attack, saying followers of Islam must protect houses of worship
(CNN) -- Books, filled with prayers for peace, splattered with blood. Sacred vestments shredded by bullets and knives. Lifeless bodies in the sanctuary.
The rabbis had gathered to ask God to bestow blessings upon their troubled land. Their prayers were interrupted by two men wielding butcher knives and a gun.
An Israeli police officer and four rabbis were killed, including an American whose family is considered "rabbinic royalty."
Combined with the site of the slaughter -- a synagogue in West Jerusalem -- the targeting of rabbis struck at the soul of Jews around the world, several Jewish leaders said Tuesday.
"This is an attack on all of us," said Rabbi Shmuel Herzfeld, who leads Ohev Sholom Synagogue in Washington. "Any terrorist attack is a horror. But to attack people while they are engaged in prayer, are talking to God, is a new low."
In fact, both sides in the seemingly endless fight between Israelis and Palestinians have attacked people at prayer.
In 1994, a Jewish extremist murdered 29 Palestinians worshiping in Hebron. In 2002, Palestinian extremists attacked a Passover Seder in Natanya, killing 30.
 Kerry: Jerusalem attacks an 'atrocity' Palestinian leadership inciting terror? Israeli PM: Punishment will be severe Terror attack in Israel kills Americans
Like those assaults, Tuesday's murders threaten to ignite another inferno of unholy violence.
Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas condemned the attack, but Hamas and other Palestinians praised the terrorists, identified by police as two cousins from East Jerusalem.
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's office vowed to "respond with a heavy hand" to the killings.
The attackers, identified as Ghassan Abu Jamal and his cousin Udayy Abu Jamal, were killed by police responding to the synagogue assault, authorities said.
Sami Abu Zuhri, a spokesman for Hamas, linked the attack to the discovery Sunday of a Palestinian bus driver hanged in his bus not far from the synagogue where the rabbis were killed.
But relatives of the terrorists told The New York Times the men were motivated by Israel's recent closure of Jerusalem's Temple Mount/Noble Sanctuary compound, a site holy to both Jews and Muslims.
The site has since been reopened, but the dispute has fueled small-scale attacks by Palestinians that have killed six Israelis in recent weeks.
In the United States, the horror of Tuesday's terror attack unified Jews across the political spectrum, even those who sharply disagree with Netanyahu's handling of the Israeli-Palestinian crisis.
In an editorial, the Jewish Daily Forward said the frustration of Palestinians "living under occupation" is understandable.
But killing innocent men at prayer is morally indefensible, the newspaper said, noting that the synagogue is in West Jerusalem, not in "contested territory."
Killing innocents anywhere is detestable, Jewish leaders said Tuesday. But there is something especially heinous about killing people while they pray.
"We look on our ministers, priests, rabbis and mullahs as intermediaries between ourselves in the divine world," said Peter Machinist, a professor of Hebrew at Harvard University.
Within the slain rabbis' ultra-Orthodox tradition, respected rabbis are assumed to have a "hot line to heaven." "So an attack on them is a little closer to being an attack on God," Machinist said.
The four rabbis killed were: Avraham Shmuel Goldberg, 58; Aryeh Kopinsky, 43; Moshe Twersky, 59; and Calman Levine. Goldberg was a dual British-Israeli citizen, and the other three were U.S.-Israeli citizens.
"This was an attack by Palestinian terrorists of pure evil and would have been utterly deplorable wherever, whenever it had occurred," said Rabbi Jonathan Sacks, the former chief of rabbi of Britain.
"But for this terrorist attack to occur in a synagogue, deliberately targeting innocent Jews deep in prayer, is something that strikes at the soul of Jewish people around the world."
Obama condemns 'horrific' Jerusalem terror attack
The Muslim Political Affairs Council also condemned Tuesday's attack.
"We strongly believe that houses of worship should be a sanctuary for all people, not a place of violence as we regretfully witnessed today. Islam commands its followers to protect houses of worship," the group said in a statement on Twitter.
Moshe Twersky, originally from Boston, comes from an almost Kennedy-like clan of respected scholars and rabbis. His father, Rabbi Isadore Twersky, was a world-renowned expert on Jewish theology and founding director of Harvard's Center for Jewish learning.
Twersky's maternal grandfather was Rabbi Joseph Soloveitchik, a philosopher and professor at Yeshiva University who was considered one of the most important minds in Modern Orthodox Judaism.
"It's a very prominent family in Jewish life, in Jewish scholarship, in Jewish theology," Machinist said.
Herzfeld said Soloveitchik was responsible for training thousands of rabbis who passed through Yeshiva University in New York, where his legacy still burns bright. Twersky's brother, Mayer, teaches at the university.
Family legacy aside, what makes Tuesday's attack all the more galling, Jewish leaders said, is that the rabbis planned to engage in the very opposite of terrorism: praying for peace.
"That's what's so horrible about this," said Herzfeld. "These people were trying to do their part to bring good into this world through their dedication to God."
'Grief and outrage' at Jerusalem synagogue slayings
Other Jewish leaders noted that the rabbis likely did not expect their morning service to be interrupted by an assault.
"If you are truly at prayer, you are most vulnerable," said Jane Eisner, the Forward's editor-in-chief.
Worshipers are not looking around for potential terrorists; they are focused on God. During the central prayer of Jewish services, the Amidah, it is considered sacrilegious to interrupt worshipers.
"Amidah" means "standing" in Hebrew, and Jews are taught to imagine themselves standing before God, asking for his blessing, said Herzfeld.
By tradition, the last prayer asks for peace in Israel. It's unclear whether the rabbis had reached that point when the slaughter began.

[cnn]

Armed Men Launch Attack On Jerusalem Synagogue, Killing At Least 4
Reuters	 | By MAAYAN LUBELL
Posted: 11/18/2014 12:41 am EST Updated: 11/18/2014 8:59 am EST

Share
Tweet
Email
Comment
Share on Google+
This frame grab from an APTN video shows the scene in Jersualem  where two Palestinians stormed a Jerusalem synagogue on Tuesday, Nov. 18, 2014, attacking worshippers praying inside with knives, axes and guns, and killing four. Police killed the attackers in a shootout. (AP Photo/APTN)



JERUSALEM, Nov 18 (Reuters) - Two Palestinians armed with a meat cleaver and a gun killed four people in a Jerusalem synagogue on Tuesday before being shot dead by police, the deadliest such incident in six years in the holy city amid a surge in religious conflict.

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu pledged to respond with a "heavy hand," and again accused Western-backed Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas of inciting violence in Jerusalem.

Abbas condemned the attack, which comes after a month of unrest fueled in part by a dispute over Jerusalem's holiest shrine.

A worshipper at the morning service in the Kehillat Bnei Torah synagogue in an ultra-Orthodox neighborhood of West Jerusalem said about 25 people were praying when shooting broke out.

"I looked up and saw someone shooting people at point-blank range. Then someone came in with what looked like a butcher's knife and he went wild," the witness, Yosef Posternak, told Israel Radio.

Photos distributed by Israeli authorities showed a man in a Jewish prayer shawl lying dead, a bloodied butcher's cleaver on the floor, several overturned prayer tables and prayer books covered in blood.

"We are viewing this as a terrorist attack," said police spokesman Micky Rosenfeld, who confirmed the four dead and that the two assailants, both from predominantly Arab East Jerusalem, had been shot dead by police.

Israel's ambulance service said at least eight people were seriously wounded.

The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP), said it carried out the attack.

"We declare full responsibility of the PFLP for the execution of this heroic operation conducted by our heroes this morning in Jerusalem," said Hani Thawbta, a PFLP leader in Gaza.

Police identified one of the dead as Rabbi Moshe Twersky, who taught at a Jerusalem seminary. Twersky was from a Hassidic rabbinical dynasty and a grandson of Joseph Soloveitchik, a renowned Boston rabbi who died in 1993.

In a statement, Abbas said: "The presidency condemns the attack on Jewish worshippers in one of their places of prayer in West Jerusalem and condemns the killing of civilians no matter who is doing it."

U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry described the attack as an act of "pure terror," and his spokeswoman said he phoned Netanyahu to offer condolences.


"MARTYRS"

Palestinian radio described the attackers as "martyrs" and the Islamist group Hamas praised the attack. Loudspeakers at mosques in Gaza called out congratulations and youngsters handed out candy in the streets.

Palestinian media named the attackers as Ghassan and Udai Abu Jamal, cousins from the Jerusalem district of Jabal Mukaber, where clashes broke out as Israeli security forces moved in to make arrests.

"Hamas calls for the continuation of revenge operations and stresses that the Israeli occupation bears responsibility for tension in Jerusalem," Hamas spokesman Sami Abu Zuhri said.

The synagogue attack came a day after a Palestinian bus driver was found hanged in his vehicle in Jerusalem. Israel said an autopsy showed he committed suicide, but his family said he was attacked. Hundreds of mourners at the driver's funeral on Sunday chanted for revenge.

Netanyahu said the synagogue attack was "a direct result of incitement" led by Hamas and Abbas, "incitement that the international community has been irresponsibly ignoring."

"We will respond with a heavy hand to the brutal murder of Jews who came to pray and were killed by lowly murderers," said Netanyahu, who summoned his security cabinet for a special session.

Violence in Jerusalem, areas of Israel and the Israeli-occupied Palestinian territories has surged in the past month, fueled in part by a dispute over Jerusalem's holiest shrine.

Five Israelis and a foreign visitor have been deliberately run over and killed or stabbed to death by Palestinians. About a dozen Palestinians have also been killed, including those accused of carrying out those attacks.

Residents trace the violence in Jerusalem to July, when a Palestinian teenager was burned to death by Jewish assailants, an alleged revenge attack for the abduction and killing of three Jewish teens by Palestinian militants in the occupied West Bank.

The summer war between Israel and Hamas militants in Gaza and a row over access to a Jerusalem compound that is sacred to Muslims and Jews alike have also been triggers for violence.

The synagogue attack was the worst in the city since 2008, when a Palestinian gunman shot dead eight people in a religious school.

The founder of Israel's Zaka emergency service, which attended the scene, described it as like the slaughter of Jews in Europe during the Holocaust.

"The images I saw inside the synagogue reminded me of images from the Holocaust -- Jews wrapped in talitot (prayer shawls) and tefilin (phylacteries) dying in pools of their own blood on the floor of the synagogue," Yehuda Meshi Zahav told Israel Radio. (Additional reporting by Nidal al-Mughrabi and Noah Browning; Editing by Luke Baker, Jeffrey Heller and Giles Elgood)

[Huffington Post]

Five Israelis killed in deadly attack on Jerusalem synagogue
Palestinians armed with cleavers and gun attack synagogue
Three victims were US-Israeli citizens, one a UK-Israeli citizen
Netanyahu vows to ‘respond with a heavy hand’
Hamas praises attack as response to ‘Israeli crimes’
Share 4994


inShare
48
Email
Peter Beaumont in Jerusalem
theguardian.com, Tuesday 18 November 2014 22.35 GMT
Peter Beaumont’s video report on the Jerusalem synagogue attack.
Five Israelis were killed and eight more wounded in a frenzied assault by two Palestinian men on Jewish worshippers praying at a Jerusalem synagogue in the most lethal incident in the city in years.

The two assailants who launched their attack with meat cleavers and a gun during early morning prayers were then killed by police officers in the ensuing gun battle at the scene of the attack.

The deaths occurred as the two men – identified by family members as cousins Ghassan and Uday Abu Jamal from the East Jerusalem district of Jabal Mukaber – burst into the Bnei Torah synagogue in Har Nof, an ultra-Orthodox Jewish neighbourhood of West Jerusalem.


Three of the victims held dual US-Israeli citizenship, and one was a British-Israeli citizen – 68-year-old Avraham Shmuel Goldberg, who emigrated to Israel from the UK in 1993.

The three US citizens were 59-year-old Moshe Twersky – the head of an English speaking religious college – Aryeh Kopinsky, 43, and Kalman Ze’ev Levine, 55. The grandson of one of the founders of the Modern Orthodox movement, Twersky lived close to the scene of the attack in Har Nof. The fifth victim was an Israeli policeman, who succumbed to his injuries late on Tuesday night.

HEARTBREAKING: Rosh Yeshiva Kollel Toras Moshe Rabbi Moshe Twersky HY"D killed in todays Jerusalem terror attack. pic.twitter.com/hhqj30xlO2

— Israel News Feed (@IsraelHatzolah) November 18, 2014
Witnesses including worshippers, residents and a first-aider who entered the synagogue while the attack was continuing, described a chaotic and bloody scene as police and the attackers engaged in a shootout at the building’s entrance.

Akiva Pollack, a paramedic who was one of the first on the scene, told the Guardian he had entered the synagogue to be confronted by an individual covered in blood.

“He said he had been shot but when he took his shirt off it was covered in deep cuts. I tried to treat him, but then I heard shooting nearby.”

Dragging one of the injured from the synagogue he reached the exit to see a policeman shot. “I tried to help him. I intubated him but he was badly wounded.”

Another medical volunteer who arrived early on the scene was Joyce Morel. She told Haaretz newspaper: “The gentleman I tended to first still had his tefillin on. There were also women there who didn’t know where their husbands were, and others who didn’t know where their father was. Those were most likely the ones killed. It was very hard to deal with, very upsetting.”

Ultra-orthodox Jews watch emergency personnel clean up and secure the area of the attack.
Ultra-orthodox Jews watch emergency personnel clean up and secure the area of the attack. Photograph: JACK GUEZ/AFP/Getty Images
A man who identified himself only as Yossi and was in the synagogue at the time of the attack, told Channel 2: “The police arrived and surrounded the entrance and then the terrorist ran out and they shot him. There was wild gunfire. People ran out of the synagogue. It was hell.”

“I tried to escape. The man with the knife approached me. There was a chair and table between us ... my prayer shawl got caught. I left it there and escaped.”

Yosef Posternak, who was also praying in the synagogue at the time of the attack, told Israel Radio that about 25 worshippers were inside when the attackers entered.

“I looked up and saw someone shooting people at point-blank range. Then someone came in with what looked like a butcher’s knife and he went wild.” He added: “I saw people lying on the floor, blood everywhere. People were trying to fight with [the attackers] but they didn’t have much of a chance,” he said.

Pictures posted by an Israeli army spokesman showed a man in a Jewish prayer shawl lying dead, a bloodied butcher’s cleaver discarded on the floor and several overturned prayer tables.

Yakov Cohen, a 60-year-old pensioner who lives in an apartment block opposite the synagogue and had been preparing to go and pray himself, described seeing the gun battle.

Footage of Israeli police firing on the Palestinian attackers from a witness
“I was getting ready to go down and pray myself. My wife had gone out for a walk,” he told the Guardian. “She called to tell me there was shooting and to stay at home.

“I saw armed police at the door of the synagogue and then heard one of them shout: ‘He’s getting ready to come out.’ An Arab came out of the building – a man in his 30s – the police shot him as he came out.”

The attack is bound to ratchet up fears of sustained violence in the city, already on edge amid soaring tensions over a contested holy site.

The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, a militant group, said the cousins were its members. A PFLP statement did not specify whether the group instructed the cousins to carry out the attack. Hamas, the militant Palestinian group that runs the Gaza Strip, also praised the attack.

Alleged terrorists, cousins Ghassan and Uday Abu Jamal, residents of Jabel Mukaber. One of them worked in the supermarket adjacent to the synagogue
Ghassan and Uday Abu Jamal, residents of Jabel Mukaber. Photograph: News Pictures/Rex
Israel’s prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, vowed that Israel would “respond harshly” to the attack, describing it as a “cruel murder of Jews who came to pray and were killed by despicable murderers”.

The US secretary of state, John Kerry, said he spoke to Netanyahu after the assault and denounced it as an “act of pure terror and senseless brutality and violence”.

“Innocent people who had come to worship died in the sanctuary of a synagogue,” Kerry said, his voice quavering.

“They were hatcheted, hacked and murdered in that holy place in an act of pure terror and senseless brutality and murder. I call on Palestinians at every single level of leadership to condemn this in the most powerful terms. This violence has no place anywhere, particularly after the discussion that we just had the other day in Amman.”

Barack Obama called on Palestinian leaders to ask ordinary citizens “to work cooperatively together to lower tensions” in a statement released by the White House. “There is and can be no justification for such attacks against innocent civilians,” the US president said.

The Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, condemned the attack, the first time he has done so since a recent spike in deadly violence against Israelis began. He also called for an end to Israeli “provocations” surrounding the sacred site.

In a statement, Abbas’s office said he “condemns the killing of the worshippers in a synagogue in west Jerusalem”. The statement called for an end to the “invasion” of the mosque at the holy site and a halt to “incitement” by Israeli ministers.

In a bleak assessment of the recent wave of violence, the Israeli justice minister, Tzipi Livni, told Army Radio that she has long feared that is a becoming a religious war. “And a religious war cannot be solved.”

Jerusalem synagogue attack
Israeli security forces secure the scene after two Palestinians attacked the synagogue. Photograph: GALI TIBBON/AFP/Getty Images
In Jabal Mukaber relatives of the two attackers offered different theories about the motives for the attack, with some linking it to the death of Palestinian bus driver found hanged behind his bus – described by Israeli authorities as a suicide – but widely believed by many palestinians to have been a “lynching”. Other family members, however, blamed recent friction at the Jerusalem holy site known to Muslims as the Noble sanctuary and to Jews as the temple Mount which has been blamed for a rash of deadly violence and clashes.

A cousin of the men, Sufian Abu Jamal, a construction worker aged 40, described it as a “heroic act and the normal reaction of what has been happening to Palestinians in jerusalem and at the Al Aqsa mosque.”

At the house of Uday, “Abu Salah”, an uncle of one of the men said his relatives had been made angry by what they had seen on Facebook and television news reports. “It was a situation ripe for an explosion and that is what happened.”

Tuesday’s attack was the latest in a series of deadly assaults. Five Israelis and a foreign visitor have been deliberately run over and killed or stabbed to death by Palestinians while about a dozen Palestinians have also been killed, including those accused of carrying out those attacks.

Residents trace the violence in Jerusalem to July, when a Palestinian teenager was burned to death by Jewish assailants, an alleged revenge attack for the abduction and killing of three Jewish teens by Palestinian militants in the occupied West Bank.

[The Guardian]

Four people were killed in a terror attack at a synagogue in a Jerusalem neighborhood Tuesday morning.

Police said two attackers from East Jerusalem entered the synagogue in the Har Nof neighborhood at 7 a.m. and began attacking worshipers at morning prayers with a gun, a meat cleaver, and an ax.

Both terrorists were killed by police within seven minutes.

Israel Police said there were six injured, including two policemen, one of whom was seriously injured, and another moderately hurt.

A man who prays at the synagogue told The Times of Israel that one of the victims was American, and another British. That report was not immediately confirmed.

The attack occurred at the Kehilat Yaakov synagogue, located in a religious institution which includes a study hall.

One of the worshipers said the two terrorists shouted “Allahu Akbar” during the attack, and entered the synagogue without their faces covered.

The two terrorists from Jabel Mukaber who carried out the attack on a Har Nof synagogue, November 18, 2014 (screen capture: Channel 2)
The two terrorists from Jabel Mukaber who carried out the attack on a Har Nof synagogue, November 18, 2014 (screen capture: Channel 2)

Photos taken from inside the synagogue after the attack showed bloodied male worshipers lying on the floor, still wrapped in their prayer shawls and phylacteries.

“I tried to escape. The man with the knife approached me. There was a chair and table between us … my prayer shawl got caught. I left it there and escaped,” Yossi, who was praying at the synagogue at the time of the attack, told Channel 2 TV. He declined to give his last name.

A witness, identified only as Zohar, said there was panic at the scene.

“I heard shooting and one of the worshipers came out covered in blood and shouted ‘There’s a massacre,'” he said.

A video shot by a bystander shows police engaged in a shootout with the attackers.



Both terrorists were from the East Jerusalem neighborhood of Jabel Mukaber, Channel 2 reported. Clashes between residents and security forces broke out in the neighborhood.

According to Israel Radio’s Gal Berger, Palestinian sources said the attackers were cousins, named Said Abu Jamal and Uday Warsan.

Initial reports indicated the two were affiliated with the Marxist-Leninist terrorist group People’s Front for the Liberation of Palestine.

Hamas and Islamic Jihad hailed the attack, saying it was in reaction to the death of a Palestinian bus driver.

In a statement, the Islamist Hamas movement, which dominates Gaza, said it was “a response to the murder of the martyr Yusuf Ramouni.” It was referring to the bus driver from East Jerusalem who was found hanged inside his vehicle late on Sunday. Palestinian media claimed he was murdered; an autopsy established that he committed suicide.

One of the terrorists worked in a corner store near the synagogue, Channel 2 reported.

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu was convening security consultations around noon, his office said.

“This is the direct result of the incitement led by Hamas and Abu Mazen,” he said, referring to Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas. “Incitement that the international community irresponsibly ignores.”

“We will respond with a strong hand to the cruel murder of Jews who came to pray, and were caught by dark murderous hands,” promised Netanyahu.

Defense Minister Moshe Ya’alon called an emergency meeting in the wake of the attack.

Public Security Minister Yitzhak Aharonovitch and Israel Police Commissioner Yohanan Danino arrived at the scene, and were heckled by bystanders, who yelled, “Go home!”

Aharonovitch described the attack as part of a new wave of terrorism by lone attackers, and promised that the security forces would do their utmost to thwart it.

Crowds at the scene shouted out psalms, while others chanted, “Death to terrorists!”

The ultra-Orthodox Har Nof neighborhood where the attack occurred sits at the Western edge of Jerusalem and has been mostly shielded from the violence that has wracked the city in recent weeks.

The attack came a day after tensions in Jerusalem once again ramped up in the wake of Ramouni’s suicide Sunday night. The driver’s family claimed he had been killed by Jewish extremists, setting off riots and strikes in the capital Monday.



Read more: Four killed in terror attack at Jerusalem synagogue | The Times of Israel http://www.timesofisrael.com/suspected-terror-attack-in-jerusalem-synagogue/#ixzz3KyRFA1eh 
Follow us: @timesofisrael on Twitter | timesofisrael on Facebook

Four killed in terror attack at Jerusalem synagogue
East Jerusalem men armed with pistol and axes target worshipers at prayer in Har Nof yeshiva complex; 6 injured, including two police; assailants killed


Read more: Four killed in terror attack at Jerusalem synagogue | The Times of Israel http://www.timesofisrael.com/suspected-terror-attack-in-jerusalem-synagogue/#ixzz3KyRHOhWL 
Follow us: @timesofisrael on Twitter | timesofisrael on Facebook

[Times of Israel]

Jerusalem synagogue: Palestinians kill Israeli worshippers
Jump media playerMedia player helpOut of media player. Press enter to return or tab to continue.
The BBC's Yolande Knell says there were chaotic scenes in the aftermath of the attack
Continue reading the main story
Israel and the Palestinians

No light on horizon
Witness describes attack Watch
Unrest explained Watch
Simmering city
Four Israelis were killed and several injured as two men armed with a pistol and meat cleavers attacked a West Jerusalem synagogue.

The two Palestinians who carried out the attack, Jerusalem's deadliest in six years, were shot dead.

Israel's PM Benjamin Netanyahu has vowed a harsh response.

He ordered the homes of the attackers to be destroyed and called for the people of Israel to stand together in the face of a "wave of terror".

Jerusalem has seen weeks of unrest, partly fuelled by tension over a disputed holy site.

'No justification'
Three of the victims were dual Israeli-US nationals, the US state department has confirmed, while the fourth was a dual Israeli-UK citizen. The funerals of the four men - all rabbis - have been held in Jerusalem, with thousands in attendance.

Jump media playerMedia player helpOut of media player. Press enter to return or tab to continue.
Israeli television footage of armed police running to the scene of the attack
Mr Netanyahu said this was a "terrible attack at a time of prayer" and condemned what he termed the "shouts of joy" from the Palestinian-controlled Gaza Strip after the attacks.

He said he was strengthening security on the streets of Jerusalem, without giving details.

Mr Netanyahu called on the people of Israel to "stand together as one" but added that it was "forbidden for anybody to take the law into their own hands, even if their blood is boiling".

Earlier, the office of Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas issued a statement saying: "The presidency condemns the attack on Jewish worshippers in their place of prayer and condemns the killing of civilians no matter who is doing it."

US President Barack Obama also condemned the attack, saying: "There is and can be no justification for such attacks against innocent civilians."

The Abu Ali Mustafa Brigades, the military wing of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, said it had carried out the attack.

line
Analysis by Kevin Connolly, BBC News, Jerusalem

Jerusalem has been a place of division fiercely contested by rival religious traditions for many hundreds of years.

In the last few weeks, tensions have risen sharply - largely as the result of the revival of an ancient dispute over rights of worship at a site within the walls of the Old City.

Muslims call the site al-Haram al-Sharif and believe it is the place where the Prophet Muhammad ascended into heaven - to Jews it is Temple Mount and marks the place where the sacred temples of their faith stood in ancient times.

By a long-standing tradition, Muslims alone have the right to pray at the site, although people of other faiths may visit.

The issue is of such sensitivity that even when Israel captured the Old City of Jerusalem during the war of 1967 it handed control of the compound back to an Islamic religious authority which continues to administer it to this day.

In recent times, some religious Jews have begun to argue for a change in the status quo which would also allow them to pray there. Any hint of such change is viewed with deep anger in the Islamic world.

Jerusalem - city on edge

What makes Jerusalem so holy

line
Map
Bloodied prayer book
A bloodied prayer book at the scene of the attack
The funeral of Rabbi Moshe Twersky in Jerusalem, 18 Nov
The funeral of Rabbi Moshe Twersky in Jerusalem
'I tried to escape'
The attack happened at the Bnei Torah Kehilat Yaakov synagogue and religious seminary site on Harav Shimon Agassi Street - home to a largely Orthodox Jewish community in the Har Nof neighbourhood.

The victims were Moshe Twersky, 59, head of the seminary, Arieh Kupinsky, 43, and Kalman Levine, 55, all of whom also held US passports. The fourth victim, Avraham Goldberg, 68, was also a UK citizen.

Police say there was a shoot-out with the attackers when officers reached the scene.

Pictures posted online by an Israeli military spokesman show a bloodied meat cleaver and bodies lying between desks and chairs on a bloodstained floor, their faces covered with their prayer shawls.

Violence at the Ofer jail, near Ramallah, 18 Nov
Violence continued on Tuesday in the West Bank, including here at the Ofer jail, near Ramallah
Two of the victims, Avraham Goldberg (left) and Moshe Twersky, 18 Nov
Two of the victims, Avraham Goldberg (left) and Moshe Twersky
"I tried to escape. The man with the knife approached me. There was a chair and table between us... my prayer shawl got caught. I left it there and escaped," one of the surviving Israelis told Channel 2 television.

line
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP)
Palestinian militant group founded in 1967, committed to the destruction of Israel
Carried out high-profile attacks in 1960s and 1970s, including airline hijacking; assassinated Israeli Tourism Minister Rehavam Zeevi in 2001
Lost influence with its rejection of the 1993 Oslo peace accord, and the rise of Islamist groups like Hamas
Leader Ahmed Saadat was imprisoned by the Palestinian Authority in 2002, but was seized by Israeli troops in 2006 and taken to Israel
Has continued to attack Israeli forces on the frontier with Gaza and to launch rockets into southern Israel
line
Jump media playerMedia player helpOut of media player. Press enter to return or tab to continue.
The synagogue attack comes after months of violence
Palestinians have identified the attackers as cousins Uday and Ghassan Abu Jamal.

In the Gaza Strip, some people distributed sweets to celebrate. Hamas, which controls Gaza, and another militant group, Islamic Jihad, praised the attack.

Hamas said it was in revenge for the death of a Palestinian bus driver found hanged inside a vehicle in Jerusalem on Monday.

Israeli police said it was a case of suicide, but the man's family did not accept the post-mortem findings.

Israeli security officers next to the synagogue in Jerusalem
Israeli forces rushed to the scene of the attack, which happened during morning prayers
Israeli emergency personnel clean the site outside a synagogue 
Emergency services clean the site outside the Jerusalem synagogue
A Palestinian woman scatters sweets at celebrations in Rafah in the Gaza Strip.
In the Gaza Strip, Palestinians distributed sweets in celebrations, some holding aloft an image of the attackers
After the attack, there were reports of clashes in the Jabal Mukaber district of East Jerusalem, as Israeli security forces moved in to make arrests that included some members of the attackers' family.

Police are also investigating reports that a Palestinian man was stabbed in the leg by three Jewish attackers in central Jerusalem.

Tensions in the city have risen in recent weeks, with two deadly attacks by Palestinian militants on pedestrians in the city and announcements by Israel of plans to build more settler homes in East Jerusalem.

Jump media playerMedia player helpOut of media player. Press enter to return or tab to continue.
President Obama: "We condemn in the strongest terms, these attacks"
Jump media playerMedia player helpOut of media player. Press enter to return or tab to continue.
Israeli government spokesman Mark Regev: "There can be no justification for this wanton violence"
Jump media playerMedia player helpOut of media player. Press enter to return or tab to continue.
Palestinian official Mustafa Barghouti: "Today is a failure of the international community"
The Jerusalem compound that has been the focus of much of the unrest - known to Jews as the Temple Mount and to Muslims as al-Haram al-Sharif - is the holiest site in Judaism, while the al-Aqsa Mosque within the compound is the third holiest site in Islam.

Orthodox Jewish campaigners in Israel are challenging the long-standing ban on Jews praying at the compound.

Palestinians want East Jerusalem, occupied by Israel since 1967, as the capital of a future state.

[BBC]

3 American rabbis among 5 dead in Jerusalem attack
Michele Chabin, Special for USA TODAY 8:18 p.m. EST November 18, 2014

Three worshippers killed in an attack at a Jerusalem synagogue Tuesday were dual U.S.-Israeli citizens. The fourth was a dual British-Israeli citizen. The attackers, two Palestinian men, were killed in a shootout with police.

israel_attack
(Photo: Gali Tibbon, AFP/Getty Images)
 3473
CONNECT
 521
TWEET
 12
LINKEDIN
 220
COMMENT
EMAIL
MORE

JERUSALEM — Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu vowed to "respond harshly" after five people — three of them U.S.-born rabbis — were killed in a synagogue Tuesday by two Palestinians wielding meat cleavers, an ax and a gun.

The incident was the latest violent event in the tense city where relations between Arabs and Jews have been deteriorating for weeks over a contested shrine holy to both Jews and Muslims.

Netanyahu immediately ordered the demolition of the attackers' homes, as well as homes of Palestinians who carried out several recent attacks.


USA TODAY
Rabbi killed in Israel attack mourned in Detroit area
Four of the dead were rabbis and one was a police officer who died of his wounds hours after the attack. Three of the rabbis were born in the United States, and the fourth was born in England, although all held dual Israeli citizenship.

The U.S.-born victims were identified as Moshe Twersky, 59, Aryeh Kupinsky, 43, and Kalman Levine, 55. The Israeli Foreign Ministry said the British man was Avraham Goldberg, 68, who immigrated to Israel in 1993.

Twersky, the grandson of a renowned rabbi from Boston, Joseph Soloveitchik, was the head of Yeshivas Toras Moshe, a religious seminary for English-speaking students. His father, Isadore Twersky, founded the Center for Jewish Studies at Harvard.


USA TODAY
Boston grieves rabbi killed in Jerusalem synagogue
Thousands of people attended a joint funeral for Kupinsky, Levine and Goldberg before sundown — held outside the synagogue where the attack occurred during morning prayers. Earlier, blood was streaked across the floors and on prayer books and shawls there.

The attack took place in the ultra-Orthodox neighborhood of Har Nof, which has a large population of English-speaking immigrants. The attackers were shot and killed by police after a shootout. Police were searching the area for other suspects.

A wounded Israeli man is taken to an ambulance after
A wounded Israeli man is taken to an ambulance after his leg was bandaged at the scene of an attack at a synagogue in Jerusalem on Nov.18.(Photo: Miri Tsachi, European Pressphoto Agency)
Police identified the attackers as Ghassan and Oday Abu Jamal, cousins from East Jerusalem.

In Washington, President Obama condemned the killings. "There is and can be no justification for such attacks against innocent civilians," he said. "The thoughts and prayers of the American people are with the victims and families of all those who were killed and injured in this horrific attack and in other recent violence."

An elderly Jew is in deep prayer in the main hall of
An elderly Jew is in deep prayer in the main hall of the Jerusalem synagogue where three American rabbis were killed.(Photo: Jim Hollander, European Pressphoto Agency)
Obama added that the incident makes it "all the more important for Israeli and Palestinian leaders and ordinary citizens to work cooperatively together to lower tensions, reject violence and seek a path forward towards peace."

Yosef Posternak, who was at the synagogue at the time of the attack, told Israel Radio that about 25 worshipers were inside when the attackers entered.

"I saw people lying on the floor, blood everywhere. People were trying to fight with (the attackers) but they didn't have much of a chance," he said.

The government announced measures to ratchet up the city's already heightened security. Schools and other educational institutions were ordered to ramp up their security. Most schools already have an armed guard stationed at their entrance because of earlier attacks.


Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas also condemned the attack, the first time he has done so since a recent spike in deadly violence against Israelis began. He called for an end to Israeli "provocations" surrounding the sacred site known to Jews as the Temple Mount and to Muslims as the Noble Sanctuary. Abbas said it was wrong for either side to kill civilians.

Sami Abu Zuhri, a spokesman for Hamas, wrote in a post on Facebook that the incident in Jerusalem was a reaction to Israeli "crimes" and called for further attacks and bloodshed.

Netanyahu, in a nationally televised address, accused Abbas of inciting the recent violence and said the Palestinian leader's condemnation of the attack was insufficient. He earlier said the international community "irresponsibly ignores" Arab attacks on Jews around the world.

"The cruel murder of Jews who came to pray and were caught by dark, murderous hands" would not go unpunished, the prime minister said.

Israeli emergency personnel remove bloody clothingIsraeli emergency personnel remove bloody clothing at the scene of an attack outside a synagogue on Nov. 18, 2014 in Har Nof, Jerusalem. Four Israeli worshippers were killed and several others wounded when two Palestinians attacked with meat cleavers and a gun. Both assailants were killed in a shootout with Israeli security forces. (Photo: Ilia Yefimovich, Getty Images)
Fullscreen
Israeli emergency personnel remove bloody clothing	A relative of Palestinian cousins Uday (L) and Ghassan	epa04494132 Emergency personnel with a blood covered	Masked Palestinians hold knifes and axes as they celebrate	An Ultra-orthodox Jewish man walks past synagogue,	An Ultra-orthodox jewish man prays at the scene of	Israeli emergency services members carry a body at	An Ultra-orthodox jewish man prays at the scene of	Four Israelis were killed in the deadliest attack in	Israeli emergency personnel walk past blood on the	Israeli security personnel stand outside a synagogue
Next Slide
Secretary of State John Kerry, who is on his way to Vienna for nuclear negotiations with Iran, said Tuesday's attack was an "act of pure terror and senseless brutality and violence."

The violence comes amid a wave of attacks by Palestinians on Israelis that killed at least six people in recent weeks.

On Monday, a Palestinian bus driver was found hanged in his vehicle. Israeli police said the death was a suicide, citing autopsy results. Palestinians suspect foul play, which has led to protests.

The latest cycle of violence began in June after the murder of three Israeli teens and a Palestinian teen erupted into a war over the summer between Israel and Hamas that led to the deaths of over 2,000 Palestinians, mostly civilians, and 72 Israelis, according to the United Nations.

[USA Today]
