Remains could be those of 43 missing Mexican students
By Mariano Castillo, CNN
updated 2:28 PM EST, Tue November 11, 2014
Watch this video
Protests after 43 students believed dead
STORY HIGHLIGHTS
Mexico's attorney general provides new details on the missing students
He says police kidnapped them at the mayor's orders
They were handed over to a gang, the attorney general says
Editor's note: Read a version of this story in Spanish.
(CNN) -- The 43 Mexican students who disappeared in southern Mexico in September were abducted by police on order of a local mayor, and are believed to have been turned over to a gang that killed them and burned their bodies before throwing some remains in a river, the nation's attorney general said Friday.
This is the conclusion that investigators have reached, Attorney General Jesus Murillo Karam said, though he cautioned that it cannot be known with certainty until DNA tests confirm the identities.
 Protests in Mexico over missing students Official: Gang killed, burned students
Photos: Missing Mexican students Photos: Missing Mexican students
 See Mexican police search for students
This will be a challenge, he said, as the badly burned fragments make it difficult to extract DNA.
"I have to identify, to do everything in my power, to identify, to know if these were the students," Murillo said.
Parents of the college students reacted immediately, some saying the evidence is inconclusive and insisting that their children are alive.
"We are not going to believe anything until the experts tell us: You know what? It is them," Mario Cesar Gonzalez, the father of one of the students, told CNN en Español.
Another parent, Isrrael Galindo, said the government is getting ahead of itself in an attempt to get protests over the disappearance of the students to stop and the public to stop demanding answers.
"The government is trying to resolve things its way so that to rid itself of this great problem it is facing," Galindo, who lives in California but whose wife and children are in Mexico, told CNN en Español.
"My son is alive. My son is alive. My son is alive," he repeated.
The parents have been highly critical of President Enrique Peña Nieto for his administration's handling of the investigation.
A cell phone video from a closed-door meeting with the President, released on YouTube, shows family members accusing Peña Nieto of being out of touch with who the students are. One family member on the recording suggests the President should resign if he can't deliver answers.
Describing the federal investigation as one of the most complex in recent times, Murillo outlined what he said befell the students from a rural teacher's college in Ayotzinapa, Guerrero state.
Police linked to disappearance
The victims were men mostly in their 20s studying to become teachers at a college in rural Ayotzinapa. On September 26, they traveled on buses and vans to nearby Iguala for a protest about lack of funding for their school. They haven't been seen or heard from since.
Three men arrested in connection with the disappearance of the students admitted to having killed a large number of people believed to be the students, Murillo said.
Murillo said police officers handed the victims to the three men, who he said belong to the Guerreros Unidos gang.
Authorities have arrested Iguala Mayor Jose Luis Abarca, called the "probable mastermind" in the mass abduction, and his wife, Maria de los Angeles Pineda. They were captured while hiding out in Mexico City earlier this week.
The school the missing students belong to has a history that dates back more than 80 years and is known as a bastion of the Mexican left. Its students are known for their activism.
 New video of missing Mexican students 43 students lost. These are their faces
Officials have said that when the mayor and his wife learned the students' protest would disrupt one of his events, the mayor ordered then-Iguala police Chief Felipe Flores Velasquez to stop the demonstration. The former police chief remains a fugitive.
Slain Mexican student's friends, family demand justice
Shortly after Murillo announced the latest in the investigation, President Peña Nieto said the findings "outrage and offend all of Mexican society."
"With firm determination, the government will continue the efforts for a full accounting of the incident," Peña Nieto said. "The capture of those who ordered it isn't enough; we will arrest everyone who participated in these abominable crimes."
So far, 74 people have been arrested in connection with the disappearance of the students, the government said.
Mexican governor steps aside after student kidnappings
Officials: Men burned at dump
Murillo on Friday repeated the claim that the order to abduct the students came from the mayor. The police confronted the students twice on their journey, killing three in one confrontation, and forcibly taking all of them to a police station the second time, the attorney general said.
The students were then moved to a location where they were handed over to members of the Guerreros Unidos gang, he said.
The gang members transported the students in various trucks to a garbage dump, Murillo said.
Some were dead already, and those who were alive were questioned by gang members about their alleged involvement with other gangs, Murillo said.
There is no evidence to show that the students were involved with gangs, he said.
The attorney general identified the three gang members who confessed as Patricio Reyes Landa, Jhonatan Osorio Gomez and Agustin Garcia Reyes.
The suspects told police they don't remember exactly how many people they killed, but they were told by their leaders that there were more than 40, Murillo said.
The abducted men were then burned at the dump in a fire that was kept alive for at least 14 hours by adding diesel fuel, tires and debris, the attorney general said.
The next day, the gang members were ordered to further break up the remains and place them in black garbage bags that were tossed into the San Juan River, Murillo said.
Scuba divers searched the river and found pieces of the bags and remains. One bag was found intact, with human remains inside, the attorney general said.
"I know the huge pain this information gives the families, a pain that we all share in solidarity," Murillo said.
The Iguala incident has sparked protests all across Mexico, some of them violent. There have been multiple acts of vandalism in Guerrero state. Protesters have blocked roads and tollbooths in cities like Chilpancingo, the capital. They have also blocked access to shopping malls in the beach resort of Acapulco.
The protests spread to the capital, where tens of thousands marched this week demanding that the missing students be found alive.
The governor of Guerrero state -- criticized for not acting quickly enough after the abductions -- has taken a leave of absence.

[CNN]

Mexico gang members 'admit killing missing students'
Jump media playerMedia player helpOut of media player. Press enter to return or tab to continue.
Mexican Attorney General Jesus Murillo: ''I know that the information we have obtained causes great pain in the families''
Continue reading the main story
Related Stories

Anger and frustration in Iguala
Mayor held in Mexico missing case
Mexicans march over missing students
Suspected gang members have confessed to killing more than 40 students missing for six weeks, Mexican Attorney General Jesus Murillo has said.

He said three alleged gang members claimed the students were handed over to them by police.

They said some were already asphyxiated and they shot the others dead, before setting fire to all the bodies.

A total of 43 students went missing after clashing with police on 26 September in the town of Iguala.

A spokesman for their families said they would not accept they were dead until it had been officially confirmed by Argentine forensic scientists working on the case.

Bags found near river
The suspects from the Guerreros Unidos drug gang were recently arrested in connection with the disappearances.

Relatives of the missing said they had been told that six bags of unidentified human remains had been found along a river near where the students vanished.

Mr Murillo warned that it would be difficult to identify the charred remains and that authorities would continue to consider the students as missing until DNA tests confirmed the identities.

Previous searches have uncovered mass graves in the area, but initial tests suggested they did not contain the remains of the students.

Students carry a banner with photographs of missing students. 5 Nov 2014
The fate of the missing 43 students has gripped Mexico
Members of the community police of Guerrero state help in the search for the missing 43 students. 7 Nov 2014
Hundreds of people have helped in the search for the students
Mr Murillo showed videotaped confessions by the suspects who said they had loaded the students into dumper trucks and taken them to a landfill site in Cocula, a city near Iguala.

About 15 of the students were already dead when they arrived and the rest were shot, according to the suspects.

Mr Murillo said the bodies were then burned with petrol, tyres, firewood and plastic in an inferno that lasted for 14 hours.

"The fire lasted from midnight to 2pm the next day. The criminals could not handle the bodies (for three hours) due to the heat," he said.

He said that the suspects then crushed the remains, stuffed them into bags and tossed them in a river.

Mr Murillo showed videos of investigators combing through small pieces of burned remains that were found in black plastic bags.

The suspects said they were not sure how many students they had taken but one said there were more than 40, Mr Murillo added.

"The high level of degradation caused by the fire in the remains we found make it very difficult to extract the DNA that will allow an identification,'' he added.

Grey line
Rubbish dump where students are alleged to have been taken. 7 Nov 2014
The students are said to have been taken to this rubbish tip outside Cocula
At the scene: Will Grant, BBC News Mexico correspondent
In what was at times a very graphic press conference, Attorney General Jesus Murillo laid out his office's findings into the disappearance of the students.

When they were handed over to the gang, around 15 of the students had already died from asphyxiation, he said. The remaining students were shot dead near a rubbish dump.

At that point, members of the gang - according to their own testimony, video clips of which were shown by the attorney general - burnt the students' bodies in a pyre.

Human remains from the river are now to be identified by experts in Austria, but Mr Murillo said it wasn't clear how long the process would take.

Grey line
However, relatives of the missing remained sceptical. The families have been highly critical of the investigation into the students' disappearance.

"As long as there are no results, our sons are alive," Felipe de la Cruz, the father of one of the disappeared, said in a statement.

"Today they're trying to close the case this way... a blatant way to further our torture by the federal government."

The case has shocked Mexico. Thousands have staged protests over what they say is collusion between officials and organised crime, along with government inaction.

President Enrique Pena Nieto has faced widespread criticism and on Friday he vowed to hunt down all those responsible for the "horrible crime".

The students from a teacher training college in Ayotzinapa, in Guerrero state, had travelled to nearby Iguala to protest against what they said were discriminatory hiring practices, and to collect funds for their college.

But they went missing after clashes with the police.

Six people were also killed after police opened fire and witnesses described seeing the students being bundled into police cars.

More than 70 people have been arrested in connection with the disappearances, including the Mayor of Iguala, Jose Luis Abarca, and his wife, Maria de los Angeles Pineda, who were detained in Mexico City on Tuesday.

Mexican officials accused Mr Abarca of ordering police to confront the students to prevent them from disrupting a public speech given by his wife.

Felipe de la Cruz, father of a missing student, addresses the media in Ayotzinapa. 7 Nov 2014
Felipe de la Cruz, father of a missing student, says the families are clinging to hope
File photo dated 8 May 2014 of Iguala mayor Jose Luis Abarca and his wife Maria de los Angeles Pineda in Chilpancingo, Mexico.
Iguala Mayor Jose Luis Abarca and his wife Maria de los Angeles Pineda had been on the run from the authorities
Grey line
Timeline: Iguala disappearance
26 Sept: Students from a teacher training college in Ayotzinapa travel to Iguala to protest and raise funds

Night of 26 Sept: Police stop the students, 6 people are shot dead, 43 students disappear

30 Sept: Iguala mayor Jose Luis Abarca asks for leave from his post, which is granted

4 Oct: Mass graves are found near Iguala containing 28 bodies

19 Oct: Federal police are deployed to Iguala and replace the municipal force

22 Oct: Mexico's prosecutor general says an arrest warrant has been issued for Mr Abarca, his wife and the town's police chief

23 Oct: Guerrero state governor Angel Aguirre resigns

29 Oct: President Enrique Pena Nieto meets the relatives of the missing students and promises a "renewed search plan"

4 Nov: Mr Abarca and his wife are arrested in Mexico City

7 Nov: Three gang members confess to killing students and burning their bodies, according to Mexico's attorney general

[BBC]

Mexico: Gang Members Confess To Mass Killing In Missing Students Probe
Reuters
Posted: 11/07/2014 4:51 pm EST Updated: 11/08/2014 9:59 am EST
Share
982
Tweet
154
 
Email
54
Comment
245
Share on Google+
Parents of the 43 missing students, attend the third massive protest against the disappearance of 43 students in the state of Guerrero. Several universities in the country called a strike for 72 hours. (Manuel Velasquez/Anadolu Agency/Getty Images)



By Lizbeth Diaz

MEXICO CITY, Nov 7 (Reuters) - Forty-three missing students abducted by corrupt police in southwest Mexico six weeks ago were apparently incinerated by drug gang henchmen and their remains tipped in a garbage dump and a river, the government said on Friday.

Attorney General Jesus Murillo said three detainees, caught a week ago, admitted setting fire to a group of bodies in a dump near Iguala in the state of Guerrero, where the trainee teachers went missing on Sept. 26 after clashing with local police.

Then, the perpetrators set about removing all the evidence, Murillo told a news conference, showing taped confessions of the detained, photographs of where remains were found and video re-enactments of how the bodies were moved.

"They didn't just burn the bodies with their clothes, they also burned the clothes of those who participated," Murillo said, adding the gang members spent over 12 hours torching the remains. "They tried to erase every possible trace."

The government says police working with a local drug gang abducted the students after the clashes. The kidnapping triggered mass protests in much of the country and seriously undermined President Enrique Pena Nieto's claims that Mexico has become safer on his watch.

The disappearances have been the toughest challenge yet to face Pena Nieto, who took office two years ago vowing to restore order in Mexico, where about 100,000 people have died in violence linked to organized crime since 2007.

A grim-faced Pena Nieto said the findings had "shocked and offended" Mexico and pledged to round up everyone involved.

"The investigations will be carried out to the full, all those responsible will be punished under the law," he said.

Dozens of police are among 74 people held in the case.

The scandal has forced Pena Nieto to cut short a planned visit to China next week, and angry relatives of the missing students said the government had only made the announcement to clear the path for the president to go.

"Pena Nieto should think hard about his trip," said Felipe de la Cruz, father of one of the missing students. "As long as there is no proof, our children are alive."

The confessions of the gang members pointed to the murder "of a large number of people," Murillo said, showing a video of one suspect saying the victims had said they were students.

Identifying the remains, which were ground up after burning, was so difficult that it was impossible to say when final results would come in, Murillo said. But there was much evidence "that could indicate it is (the students)," he added.

Teeth of victims found at the scene were so badly burned that they virtually turned to dust upon contact, Murillo said, adding that the remains would be sent to the University of Innsbruck in Austria for final DNA identification.

The government would continue to view the students as missing until their identities are confirmed, he added.

This week, Mexican police captured the former mayor of Iguala and his wife, who the government suspects of being the probable masterminds of the abductions.

Testimony from investigators suggested that the students, from an all-male leftist college, had clashed with the mayor in the past and that the city police had handed them over to local gangsters who killed them.

The case has dented Pena Nieto's popularity and derailed his efforts to turn public attention toward a string of reforms he passed in the first part of his government, which he hopes will spur stronger growth in Mexico's misfiring economy. (Reporting by Lizbeth Diaz and Dave Graham; Editing by Simon Gardner, James Dalgleish and Ken Wills)

[Huffington]

Mexican gang suspected of killing 43 students admits to mass murder
Mexico’s attorney general says detainees admitted setting fire to bodies whose unidentified remains are believed to be those of the missing students

Share 3388


inShare
22
Email
Jo Tuckman in Mexico City
theguardian.com, Saturday 8 November 2014 01.10 GMT
Missing Mexican students
A member of the community police of Guerrero holds up Mexico’s national flag as they march to demand the safe return of the missing 43 students. Photograph: Daniel Becerril/Reuters
Any hope of finding alive the 43 students who disappeared nearly six weeks ago in the southern city of Iguala after being attacked by police, has been close to extinguished by the announcement by federal investigators that they have established that a large group of people were massacred by a local drug trafficking gang in a nearby rubbish dump on the same night.

Attorney General Jesús Murillo told a press conference, however, that while there are “many indications” that the victims were the students, the human remains left by the massacre and recovered by investigators from a nearby river are so badly burned that they cannot currently be identified.

The students, he said, remained “disappeared” and the investigation was continuing.

“I know the huge pain that the information we have obtained causes the family members,” Murillo said. “This is something that should never have happened, and must never be repeated.”

The disappearance of the students has exposed both the terrifying levels of violence in some parts of Mexico where organised criminal groups dominate large territories, and the direct involvement of some local authorities in the horror. 

It has also underlined the long standing tolerance by the federal authorities of collusion between local politicians, police forces and organised crime. Under pressure to prove that this tolerance has come to an end, Murillo went over the evidence in the case of the disappeared students so far in a lengthy and chilling account of the events that began, he said, when the mayor of Iguala ordered the municipal police to attack the students on the night of 26 September. 

“He didn’t say that they should be kidnapped and killed,” Murillo said. “But the order makes it clear that they [the police]should act in that way.” The students, from a radical teacher training college about two hours from Iguala were in the city to commandeer buses to use in a later protest. 

Police opened fire on them as they were leaving the city in a series of attacks that left six people dead. They also arrested dozens. Murillo said police handed the arrested students over to members of the Guerreros Unidos gang who had allegedly worked closely with Mayor José Luis Abarca since he took office two years ago to the point of setting up check points at the entrance to Iguala to keep out rival gangs.

His wife, Maria de los Angeles Piñeda, was also allegedly close to the group. Both Abarca and Piñeda went underground in the wake of the events, but were arrested this week in Mexico City.

The new evidence, Murillo said, stemmed from the arrest of three gang members over the last week who confessed to participating in the massacre of a large number of people estimated by one of the detainees as over 40, but not explicitly identified as the students. 

Exerts of the videotaped confessions shown in the press conference showed the suspects describing how they had loaded their victims onto trucks and taking them to a rubbish tip just outside the neighbouring town of Cocula. One said that about 15 were already dead when they arrived, and the rest were shot after being interrogated. They also described building a huge pyre of the bodies fuelled by diesel, gasoline, tires, wood and plastic. It burned, they said, from about midnight until 2 or 3pm.

The investigation had previously led to the recovery of 38 bodies from other mass graves in the Iguala area that analysis showed did not belong to the students. Murillo said that four of these have now been identified, including a father and son. He also said there were women in the graves, which ruled out a positive identification of the missing students who are all young men.

The detainees told the authorities that they collected the remains in black plastic bags after the ashes had cooled later that afternoon and dumped them in the San Juan river. Murillo said that investigators found evidence of the pyre and retrieved the plastic bags and human remains from the river. 

A video shown at the press conference showed charred bone fragments and teeth found in the river and on its banks. “The degradation caused by the fire make it very difficult to extract the DNA that will allow identification,” Murillo said, adding that the teeth turned to dust when handled.

He said the authorities were turning to a specialist lab in Austria in the hope that other remains might still contain enough DNA to allow identification. He stressed that the lab has said it is not possible to predict when this might be clear.

The families, who have always sustained the hope that the students are being held somewhere alive, reacted angrily to the news of the massacre that they received directly from Murillo in a brief and reportedly tense private meeting prior to the press conference.

“They are trying to close the case,” Felipe de la Cruz, the father of one of the disappeared students told a press conference called to respond to the announcement of massacre. “As long as there are no scientific results, our children are alive.”

[The Guardian]

Mexican Officials Detail Horrific Scenario For Murdered Students

Mexican Gang Admits to Killing Missing Students
 
 
 
MEXICO CITY — Drug gang members have described a horrific effort to make 43 teachers college students disappear, detailing an industrial-scale effort involving piling their bodies like cord wood on a pyre that burned for 15 hours and then wading into the ashes to pulverize, bag and dispose of remaining teeth and bones. Mexico's Attorney General Jesus Murillo Karam laid out Friday what investigators think happened to the students who have not been seen since being attacked by police Sept. 26 in the southern city of Iguala.

He played video of presumed gang members confessing, and another video showed hundreds of charred fragments of bone and teeth that had been dumped in and along the San Juan River in the neighboring town of Cocula. According to confessions, the students were driven to killing grounds in a dump truck so tightly packed about 15 of the young men suffocated to death. The others were then slain, apparently shot to death before being burned.

Authorities say the high level of degradation caused by the fire makes identification difficult, and they are sending remains to a specialized laboratory in Austria. Some 74 people have been detained so far in the case, including Iguala's Mayor and his wife, who have been found to have ties to organized crime. Parents reacting to Murillo Karam's report said they have lost trust in anything the government says.

"As long as there are no results, our sons are alive," said Felipe de la Cruz, the father of one of the disappeared. "Today they're trying to close the case this way ... a blatant way to further our torture by the federal government."

[NBC]
