German Town Pranks Neo-Nazis By Turning Their March Into Charity Walkathon
  Share
  Tweet
By Kayla Ruble

November 18, 2014 | 2:27 pm
Every year, neo-Nazi groups descend on a small German town to pay tribute to a notorious Hitler deputy who used to be buried there. This year, however, the townspeople pulled one over on their visitors: They turned the march into a charity walkathon that raised 10,000 euros ($12,533) for an anti-extremist foundation.

Nazi official Rudolf Hess committed suicide in prison in 1987 and was eventually buried in Wunsiedel, a town of about 1,000 in Bavaria. For more than 20 years, fascist groups have held an annual festival and memorial march in the town in his honor. Despite bans, court challenges, and local disapproval, at least a few hundred neo-Nazi pilgrims have landed there each year.

Argentina legally recognizes a neo-Nazi's new political party. Read more here.

On Saturday, more than 250 people participated in the annual march for Hess. Unbeknownst to them, a group of local activists recruited businesses and people in the town to donate 10 euros ($12.50) for every meter walked by the neo-Nazis.

A video made by the activist organization Rechts gegen Rechts, or Right Against Right, shows the procession of neo-Nazi participants dressed mostly in black walking through the streets. Some have drums strapped on their chests, while others carry torches and banners.


Meet the man who's been trolling neo-Nazis for the past decade. Read more here.

Rechts gegen Rechts, which fights against far-right politics, called the event the "most involuntary walkathon," and put up mocking signs — one said "If only the Führer knew" — along the route.

The neo-Nazis weren't informed about their charitable giving until they crossed the finish line, where they were greeted with a sign thanking them for their donations. Adding further insult to injury, the proceeds were donated to EXIT Deutschland, an organization that assists people who want to leave extremist groups.

Locals in Wunsiedel have long been fed up with the neo-Nazi tourists, even successfully working with Hess's family to move the deputy's remains out of town, but that hasn't deterred the festival-goers from making the yearly trip for Volkstrauertag — a public holiday that commemorates people who died in war.

"We want to show what else you can do, what other courses of action you have. You can do more than just block the street or close the shutters," Rechts gegen Rechts organizer Fabian Wichmann told the German media outlet DPA, according to the Guardian.

According to government figures, there are an estimated 9,600 right-wing extremists currently active in Germany. Neo-Nazis hold parliament positions in two states and have a representative in the European parliament, but the German Constitutional Court is currently considering a ban on the country's oldest far-right party, the National Democratic Party of Germany.

[Vice News]

Watch: German town plays prank on neo-Nazis
Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on Google Plus Share via Email More Options
Resize Text Print Article Comments 121
By Rick Noack November 17  
 
Policemen are standing next to banners of the action group "Wunsiedel is Colorful" along the route of a demonstration by far-right extremists. (Fricke/Agence France-Presse via Getty Images)
For decades, neo-Nazis have traveled to the southeastern German town of Wunsiedel, where Rudolf Hess, Adolf Hitler's deputy, was buried until 2011. The right-wing extremists march through the town in commemoration of Hess year after year, glorifying the horrors of the Third Reich.

This time, however, everything was different: Although Wunsiedel's inhabitants had observed the march from a distance over the past years, this Nov. 15, some of them welcomed the neo-Nazi protesters effusively with rainbow confetti and even cheered for them. What had happened?

No, the residents of Wunsiedel — most of them skeptical and critical of the neo-fascists — had not suddenly turned into Nazi sympathizers.

Instead, the group Rights versus Rights (Rechts gegen Rechts) had come up with a new way to protest the annual neo-Nazi march: For every meter the neo-Nazis walked, local businesses and residents would donate $12.50 to a nongovernmental organization devoted to making it easier for neo-Nazis to leave behind their hateful politics. The scene was captured on video by the group:


The group Rights versus Rights (Rechts gegen Rechts) turned a walk that traditionally celebrates Rudolf Hess, Adolf Hitler's deputy, into a fundraiser for helping neo-Nazis move away from their ideology. (YouTube/Rechts gegen Rechts)
The 200 neo-Nazis had only two choices when they got to know about the plan: Either they proceeded, indirectly donating money to the EXIT Germany initiative, or they acknowledged their defeat and suspended the march.

The neo-Nazis decided to pursue their plans — and participated in raising funds for an organization committed to their downfall. According to a news release by the organizers, street banners ironically encouraged the neo-Nazis to continue their march with words such as "Final sprint instead of victory" — a reference to the fact that many neo-Nazis refuse to acknowledge that Hitler's goal was to gain a "final victory" over the Jews.

 
Police officers keep watch along the route of a demonstration by far-right extremists in the southeastern German town of Wunsiedel. (Fricke/Agence France-Presse via Getty Images)
Germany has a long history of violent clashes between left-wing and right-wing protesters attempting to stop each other's marches. Each year in February, inhabitants of the eastern German city of Dresden commemorate the bombardment and destruction of their city during World War II. Since the fall of the Berlin Wall, neo-Nazis have increasingly abused the commemorations to organize massive gatherings and marches that have ended in open streetfights with authorities and left-wing activists.

Given the often-violent nature of those "commemorations," the idea to turn a neo-Nazi spectacle into an occasion of tolerance and charity was a breath of fresh air. "We wanted to create an alternative to counter-demonstrations," Fabian Wichmann, an education researcher at EXIT Germany, told the Local, a German news site, on Monday.

Many German Twitter users praised the idea. "This is how one should fight neo-Nazis — and not by behaving even more violently than them," one person wrote.

[Washington Post]

 	
German village plays prank on neo-Nazis
Residents of Wunsiedel, where Hitler's deputy Rudolf Hess is buried, are tired of yearly invasion of neo Nazis to their village, so they decide neo-Nazis can march for a good cause.
Marlene Halser
Published: 	11.17.14, 16:10 / Israel News


They keep coming back year after year. Since the 1990s, neo-Nazi demonstrators invade the village of Wunsiedel in south Germany every November to commemorate the National Heroes' Remembrance Day by visiting the grave of Adolf Hitler’s Deputy, Rudolf Hess, which was located in the village until it was dissolved in 2005 when the lease agreement ran out.
 
Follow Ynetnews on Facebook and Twitter 
 
The almost 1,000 inhabitants of Wunsiedel have been trying to stop these demonstrations every time, to no avail. They held counter demonstrations and formed action groups dedicated to tolerance, commitment and moral courage. 
 
With flags and wreaths, neo Nazis commemorate a so called 'National Heroes' Remembrance Day.'
With flags and wreaths, neo Nazis commemorate a so called 'National Heroes' Remembrance Day.'
 
This year Wunsiedel gave it another try – with a completely new approach.
 
Even though the number of neo-Nazis decreased after reaching its peak in 2004 with 4,500 protesters, and they were repeatedly barred by the courts from holding their demonstration, the neo-Nazis have yet to give up their so-called annual “March of Remembrance”.
 
Instead of taking the neo-Nazis seriously, this time they decided to play a prank on them. Under the slogan "Right against right: (“rechts gegen rechts”), Wunsiedel's residents gave the neo-Nazis' march a new purpose.
 

 
For each meter the neo-Nazis marched last Saturday throughout the village, local companies donated 10 euro for a project called “Exit”, a NGO that supports neo-Nazis who are ready to leave the milieu.
 
The neo-Nazis themselves only learned of the villagers' prank while their march was already underway, walking through the village and carrying their flags and wreaths solemnly.
 
With flags and wreaths, neo Nazis commemorate a so called 'National Heroes' Remembrance Day.'
With flags and wreaths, neo Nazis commemorate a so called 'National Heroes' Remembrance Day.'
 
To make them aware of what they were inadvertently taking part in, the people of Wunsiedel put up colorful posters along their route, thanking the neo-Nazis for their participation.
 
Banners put up along the neo Nazis' march route; 'National and generous,' 'My food' and 'Donations march.'
Banners put up along the neo Nazis' march route; 'National and generous,' 'My food' and 'Donations march.'
 
"Wenn das der Führer wüsste" ("If the Führer would know") said a pink banner they had to walk by, "Brisk like greyhounds, tough like leather, and generous like never before" ("Flink wie die Windhunde, zäh wie Leder, grosszügig wie nie") said another one, in reference to former Nazi slogans from the Third Reich.
 
Even food was provided for the neo-Nazi protesters, who tried to ignore the prank as much as possible. Under a banner saying "Mein Mampf" ("My food") instead of "Mein Kampf" (the title of Hitler's book), the village offered bananas to the demonstrators.
 
On the pavement, village residents had placed landmarks informing the marching neo-Nazis how much money they had already raised by walking through the village – with a total of 10,000 Euro in donations collected for the NGO.

[YNet News]

German town tricks neo-Nazis into raising thousands of euros for anti-extremist charity
Far-right extremists inadvertently take part in ‘walkathon’ to raise money for group that helps rightwingers escape extremism 

Share 22664


inShare
29
Email
Elena Cresci
 
theguardian.com, Tuesday 18 November 2014 17.01 GMT
Jump to comments (…)
Campaigners in Wunsiedel came up with a novel way to tackle an extremist march on November 15 – by turning the event into a sponsored walkathon.
Campaigners in Wunsiedel came up with a novel way to tackle an extremist march on November 15 – by turning the event into a sponsored walkathon. Photograph: Rechts Gegen Rechts /http://www.rechts-gegen-rechts.de/
Neo-Nazis gathered in a small German town found themselves the target of an anti-fascist prank this week when they inadvertently raised €10,000 for an anti-extremist organisation.

For decades, far-right extremists have marched through Wunsiedel in Bavaria every year, to the despair of those who live there. This year, the organisers of Rechts gegen Rechts (Right against Right) took a different approach.

Without the marchers’ knowledge, local residents and businesses sponsored the 250 participants of the march on 15 November in what was dubbed Germany’s “most involuntary walkathon”. For every metre they walked, €10 went to a programme called EXIT Deutschland, which helps people escape extremist groups.


Campaigners hung humorous posters to make the march look more like a sporting event, with slogans such as “If only the Führer knew!” and “Mein Mampf” (my munch) next to a table laden with bananas. They even hung a sign at the end, thanking the marchers for their “donations”.

Weil es so schön war. Im Spendenschritt Marsch! #RechtsgegenRechts #wunsiedel pic.twitter.com/xQ6Ncr9490

— exit deutschland (@exitdeutschland) November 16, 2014
Neo-Nazis are attracted to the town because Hitler’s deputy Rudolf Hess was once buried there. Though his remains were exhumed in 2011 and his grave was destroyed, far-right extremists still flock to the town year after year. Residents have attempted protests and numerous legal complaints to no avail – Wunsiedel is still treated as a place of pilgrimage for neo-Nazis all over Europe.

Gleich sind sie reif. Gleich gibt es "Mein Mampf" für den Endspurt #wunsiedel #rechtsgegenrechts pic.twitter.com/xXPDpbJNnf

— Rechts gegen Rechts (@RechtsgegRechts) November 15, 2014
One of Rechts gegen Rechts’ organisers Fabian Wichmann, an education researcher at EXIT, told German news agency DPA: “We want to show what else you can do, what other courses of action you have. You can do more than just block the street or close the shutters.”

[The Guardian]

German town tricks neo-Nazis into raising money for an anti-Nazi charity

The inhabitants of Wunsiedel have struggled for years to stop neo-Nazis from marching in their town
KIRAN MOODLEY  Author Biography   Tuesday 18 November 2014
	
	
	
	
	
	
5K
PRINT A A A
The residents of a small German town managed to turn a neo-Nazi rally into an anti-Nazi fundraiser by playing a trick on the supporters of the Third Reich.

For many years, Wunsiedel has become awash with neo-Nazis every November when supporters march through the town in honour of the National Heroes' Remembrance Day. They choose Wunsiedel because it was the original burial site of Rudolf Hess, Deputy Fuhrer to Adolf Hitler from 1933 to 1941.

In 2011, the roughly 1,000 inhabitants of the town managed - with the agreement of family members - to get Hess' remains exhumed and his gravestone destroyed. However, marchers still flock to the town, albeit in smaller numbers.

So this year, come the march on November 15, a campaign called "Rechts gegen Rechts" (Right against Right) decided to turn the neo-Nazi rally into a charity walk.

Instead of protesting against the demonstration, shop owners and residents in Wunsiedel pledged to donate 10 euro for each metre the neo-Nazis marched.

They managed to raise 10,000 euros. The money went towards EXIT-Deutschland, a charity that helps people leave neo-Nazi groups.


The pro-Hess marchers had no idea until they began their walk, noticing along the route that villagers had set up motivational signs and showered them with confetti when they finished.

A sign explained to them they had just raised money against themselves as they crossed the finishing line.

"It was an absolute success," said Inge Schuster, spokesperson for the mayor of Wunsiedel, told The Local. "It created something positive out of (the march), including the €10,000 donation for EXIT-Deutschland."

The villagers even provided food for the neo-Nazis along their journey. The edibles were on offer under a banner that read "Mein Mampf" meaning "My Food".

Fabian Wichmann, a researcher at EXIT-Deutschland told The Local, "They probably won't go away. The history of the town is too important to them, but at least we've created something good out of it."

[Independent]
