Grand Jury Declines To Indict NYPD Officer In Chokehold Death Of Eric Garner
Posted: 12/03/2014 2:30 pm EST Updated: 12/04/2014 10:59 am EST 
Share
7485
Tweet
2031
0
Email
100
Comment
3093
Share on Google+
A grand jury in Staten Island voted Wednesday not to indict New York City police officer Daniel Pantaleo in the death of Eric Garner, a black man who died after being placed in a chokehold.

Garner, 43, died July 17 while he was being arrested for selling untaxed cigarettes. In a video of the arrest, which has since gone viral, Garner screams “I can’t breathe!” multiple times until his body goes limp. A medical examiner later said that he died of a chokehold, a move that is banned by the NYPD, and ruled his death a homicide.

Garner's attorney said Wednesday that the "family is very upset and disappointed that these officers are not getting indicted for any criminal conduct."

Pantaleo said in a statement Wednesday that he regretted Garner's death.

“I became a police officer to help people and to protect those who can’t protect themselves," Pantaleo said. "It is never my intention to harm anyone and I feel very bad about the death of Mr. Garner. My family and I include him and his family in our prayers and I hope that they will accept my personal condolences for their loss.”

garner

New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio called Garner's death "a terrible tragedy that no family should have to endure," and said he would continue to work to decrease the use of excessive force among officers.

"This is a subject that is never far from my family’s minds – or our hearts," he said. "And Eric Garner’s death put a spotlight on police-community relations and civil rights – some of most critical issues our nation faces today."

The decision in the Garner case comes just over a week after a grand jury in Ferguson, Missouri, declined to indict officer Darren Wilson in the shooting death of Michael Brown. A series of protests erupted nationwide immediately following the decision in Ferguson, and New York officials braced for similar protests on Wednesday.

garner

Heightened police presence is expected throughout Staten Island and across the city to help quell demonstrations as they unfold. De Blasio cleared his schedule once the decision was announced, and he is expected to go to Staten Island to meet with officials and activists.

The mayor acknowledged in his statement that many would be upset with the outcome, and encouraged protesters not to resort to violence.

"New York City owns a proud and powerful tradition of expressing ourselves through non-violent protest," he said. "We trust that those unhappy with today’s grand jury decision will make their views known in the same peaceful, constructive way. We all agree that demonstrations and free speech are valuable contributions to debate, and that violence and disorder are not only wrong – but hurt the critically important goals we are trying to achieve together."

garner

Civil rights leader Al Sharpton told The New York Times Wednesday that he had spoken with the Garner family and they were not surprised by the announcement. He also said that before the grand jury had reached its decision, he had met with federal prosecutors to ask them to take over the case.

“People thought we were being extreme,’” Sharpton said. “But now, I think you can see, we have no confidence in the state grand juries, whether in Ferguson or in New York, because there is an intrinsic relationship between state prosecutors and the police; they depend on the police for their evidence, they run for office and depend on the unions for endorsements.”

State Assemblyman Karim Camara, chair of the Black, Puerto Rican, Hispanic and Asian Legislative Caucus, ridiculed the non-indictment as an "outrage," but urged peaceful protest from New York residents.

"District Attorney Donovan's failure to win an indictment against the police officer responsible for Eric Garner’s death is an outrage," Camara said in a statement. "However, it’s important that we first remember that Mr. Garner’s life was lost and even an indictment would not have brought him back. Our thoughts and prayers should be with his family today."

The New York Civil Liberties Union, meanwhile, called for wholesale reform of the NYPD.

“The failure of the Staten Island Grand Jury to file an indictment in the killing of Eric Garner leaves New Yorkers with an inescapable question: How will the NYPD hold the officers involved accountable for his death? And what will Commissioner Bratton do to ensure that this is the last tragedy of its kind?," said NYCLU Executive Director Donna Lieberman.

"Unless the Police Department aggressively deals with its culture of impunity and trains officers that they must simultaneously protect both safety and individual rights, officers will continue to believe that they can act without consequence.”

garner

NYPD guidelines banned chokeholds in 1993, but many people have lodged complaints against the police department since then for continuing to use them. There were more than 1,000 complaints regarding the NYPD's use of chokeholds between 2009 to 2013, according to the city's Civilian Complaint Review Board.

"Here we are, 20 years after the NYPD placed an absolute ban on chokeholds, and we still see that they are widely used and sometimes to used to deadly effect," City Council Member Rory Lancman told The Huffington Post in July. "Clearly, we need to do more to deter use of chokeholds and hold people accountable when they are used."

garner

Garner's family members plans to file a wrongful death lawsuit against the city seeking $75 million in damages.

As the video of Garner's death went viral, the man who filmed it was indicted on an unrelated weapons charge. Critics claim that police were retaliating against the man for capturing the incident on video. 

[Huffington]

Wave of Protests After Grand Jury Doesn’t Indict Officer in Eric Garner Chokehold Case
By J. DAVID GOODMAN and AL BAKERDEC. 3, 2014
Continue reading the main storySlide Show

SLIDE SHOW|13 Photos
Streets Filled With Demonstrators
Streets Filled With DemonstratorsCreditRobert Stolarik for The New York Times
Continue reading the main storyShare This Page
Share
Tweet
Email
Save
MORE
A Staten Island grand jury on Wednesday ended the criminal case against a white New York police officer whose chokehold on an unarmed black man led to the man’s death, a decision that drew condemnation from elected officials and touched off a wave of protests.

The fatal encounter in July was captured on videos and seen around the world. But after viewing the footage and hearing from witnesses, including the officer who used the chokehold, the jurors deliberated for less than a day before deciding that there was not enough evidence to go forward with charges against the officer, Daniel Pantaleo, 29, in the death of the man, Eric Garner, 43.

Officer Pantaleo, who has been on the force for eight years, appeared before the grand jury on Nov. 21, testifying that he did not intend to choke Mr. Garner, who was being arrested for allegedly selling loose cigarettes. He described the maneuver as a takedown move, adding that he never thought Mr. Garner was in mortal danger.

Continue reading the main story
RELATED COVERAGE

video Eric Garner Decision: Social Media VentsDEC. 4, 2014
video Obama Comments on Garner DecisionDEC. 3, 2014
Mayor Bill de Blasio spoke at Mount Sinai United Christian Church in Staten Island on Wednesday.De Blasio Reacts as Mayor and a FatherDEC. 3, 2014
In Chokehold Case, Protesters Revive a Staten Island Man's Dying WordsDEC. 3, 2014
On Wednesday, a protester sat on Bay Street, where Eric Garner was killed, on Staten Island.Officer Daniel Pantaleo Told Grand Jury He Meant No Harm to Eric GarnerDEC. 3, 2014
The police starting set up barricades outside the Staten Island courthouse before the grand jury's decision.Reaction to Eric Garner Grand Jury DecisionDEC. 3, 2014
The decision came barely a week after a grand jury found no criminality in the actions of another white police officer, Darren Wilson, who shot and killed Michael Brown, an unarmed 18-year-old black man in Ferguson, Mo.

Continue reading the main storyVideo

PLAY VIDEO|3:41
New York Mourns Eric Garner, Again
New York Mourns Eric Garner, Again
After a grand jury declined to indict the officer who killed Eric Garner, his family called for peace, and New Yorkers vented their emotions in the streets. Video by Adam Freelander, Mac William Bishop, Joshua Davis and Stephen Farrell on Publish Date December 4, 2014. Photo by Kirsten Luce for The New York Times.
After the news from Staten Island, a wave of elected officials renewed calls for Justice Department intervention, saying the grand jury’s finding proved that justice could be found only in the federal courts. By the evening, the department announced it would open a civil rights inquiry.

On the streets of the city, from Tompkinsville to Times Square, many expressed their outrage with some of the last words Mr. Garner uttered before being wrestled to the ground: “This stops today,” people chanted. “I can’t breathe,” others shouted.

While hundreds of angry but generally peaceful demonstrators took to the streets in Manhattan as well as in Washington and other cities, the police in New York reported relatively few arrests, a stark contrast to the riots that unfolded in Ferguson in the hours after the grand jury decision was announced in the Brown case.

President Obama, speaking in Washington, said the decisions in New York and Missouri highlighted the frustrations that many African-Americans have harbored about a legal system that has a long history of discrimination against black people.

“When anybody in this country is not being treated equally under the law, that is a problem,” Mr. Obama said, “and it’s my job as president to help solve it.”

Continue reading the main story
GRAPHIC
5 Key Moments in the Death of Eric Garner
The panel’s rationale was not made public, but issues such as whether Mr. Garner was resisting arrest may have been a factor.


 OPEN GRAPHIC
Officer Pantaleo said in statement on Wednesday that he felt “very bad about the death of Mr. Garner,” just as he had told the 23 panelists of the grand jury when he testified before them for two hours.

During the proceedings, jurors were shown three videos of the encounter, and in his testimony Officer Pantaleo sought to characterize his actions as a maneuver taught at the Police Academy. He said that while holding onto Mr. Garner, he felt fear that they would crash through a plate glass storefront as they tumbled to the ground, said Stuart London, his lawyer. One of the officer’s arms went around Mr. Garner’s throat, as Mr. Garner repeatedly said, “I can’t breathe, I can’t breathe.”

Appearing with the Rev. Al Sharpton in Harlem, Mr. Garner’s widow, Esaw Garner, said she did not accept the officer’s apology.

“Hell, no,” Ms. Garner said. “The time for remorse for the death of my husband was when he was yelling to breathe.”

She said that while she mourned, the officer could go home to his family.

Continue reading the main story

Columbus
Circle
0.5 miles
Rockefeller
Center
West Side
Highway
Grand
Central
Terminal
Times
Square
Lincoln
Tunnel
entrance
MANHATTAN
Some protest
sites and routes,
through 1 a.m.
Brooklyn
Bridge
By The New York Times
“He’s still feeding his kids,” she said, “and my husband is six feet under and I’m looking for a way to feed my kids now.”

Mayor Bill de Blasio, speaking on Staten Island, said that it was a “deeply emotional day” for the Garner family and all New Yorkers, and that he had thought of his own son in considering Mr. Garner’s fate. But he implored demonstrators to voice their outrage peacefully and not engage in the destructive violence that followed protests in Ferguson over Mr. Brown’s death.

“Today’s outcome is one that many in our city did not want,” Mr. de Blasio said. “Yet New York City owns a proud and powerful tradition of expressing ourselves through nonviolent protest.”

An autopsy by the city’s medical examiner found that Mr. Garner’s death was a homicide resulting from the chokehold — a maneuver banned by the Police Department in 1993 — and the compression of his chest by police officers.

In early September, the Staten Island district attorney, Daniel M. Donovan Jr., impaneled the grand jury to weigh evidence; it heard testimony from the officers involved and 22 civilian witnesses. All of the officers, with the exception of Officer Pantaleo, were granted immunity.

Continue reading the main storyVideo

PLAY VIDEO|7:21
Video From Eric Garner’s Arrest Video From Eric Garner’s Arrest
A New York police officer used a chokehold on Eric Garner, who died while being put under arrest. Video by Taisha Allen on Publish Date July 20, 2014. 
The encounter exposed apparent lapses in police tactics and raised questions about the aggressive policing of minor offenses in a time of historically low crime. The officers involved, part of a plainclothes unit, suspected Mr. Garner of selling cigarettes on the street near the Staten Island Ferry Terminal, a complaint voiced by local business owners.

Continue reading the main story
RECENT COMMENTS

J Lindros 3 hours ago
Wow. We have reached some state in the US when a huge, morbidly obese African American man with a record of dozens of arrests resists on...
karolee 3 hours ago
The fact that the grand jury did not indict this PO only causes more vilolence. I pray for his family..
RajS 4 hours ago
One thing stands out from the recent cases... it's open carry for whites, and open season on blacks... and I am only half joking! What a...
SEE ALL COMMENTS
Mr. Garner’s death hastened an effort to retrain all the department’s patrol officers and brought scrutiny on how officers who violate its rules are disciplined. Officer Pantaleo has been stripped of his gun and badge during the investigation.

Now, Mr. de Blasio said, the grand jury decision had accelerated the need for that overhaul. Earlier on Wednesday, the mayor announced the start of a pilot program to equip officers with body cameras to record encounters on patrol.

But how useful such technology will prove to be in settling disputes over police actions remains an open question. Mr. Garner’s relatives had believed for months that a widely circulated cellphone video of the violent arrest that caused his death would be enough to convince grand jurors that the case merited a criminal trial.

Jonathan C. Moore, a lawyer for the Garner family, said “We’re astounded by the outcome of the grand jury process.”

Continue reading the main story

Graphic: Fatal Police Encounters in New York City
In a statement, Mr. Donovan said investigators also spoke with the emergency responders who provided medical treatment both at the scene and at the hospital, and expert witnesses in the area of forensic pathology as well as the procedures and training of police officers. He said that he was constrained by law from discussing details of their findings, but that he had petitioned the court for “authorization to publicly release specific information in connection with this grand jury investigation.”

He expressed his condolences to the family and said his office conducted a thorough investigation that “spanned four months.”

“I assured the public that I was committed to a fair, thorough, and responsible investigation into Mr. Garner’s death,” he said.

Grand juries determine whether enough evidence exists for a case to go forward to a criminal trial, either before a jury or a judge. By law, they operate in secret and hear only evidence presented by prosecutors, who also instruct the grand jurors on the law. Defense lawyers are barred from speaking. For a decision, 12 jurors who have heard all of the evidence must agree.

While the exact makeup of the grand jury was unclear, Mr. London said it was roughly half white, with the other half evenly divided among blacks and Hispanics.

With the criminal phase over, Officer Pantaleo’s fate moves into the realm of Police Department discipline. It is far from clear if he will return to enforcement duties, and Commissioner William J. Bratton said he would remain on suspension pending an internal investigation.

Even before Mr. Garner’s death, Mr. Bratton had been tasked by the mayor with repairing the fissures between the police and the communities they serve, moving away from street stops and minor marijuana arrests. Those changes, however, have yet to quell the anger that deaths such as Mr. Garner’s bring forth.

Reporting on the grand jury’s decision in the death of Eric Garner was contributed by Ronnie Cohen, Emma G. Fitzsimmons, Edna Ishayik, Mark Landler, James C. McKinley Jr., Benjamin Mueller, Kate Pastor, William K. Rashbaum, Marc Santora, Nate Schweber, Nikita Stewart, Alex Vadukul and Benjamin Weiser.

[NY Times]

Protests after N.Y. cop not indicted in chokehold death; feds reviewing case
By Ray Sanchez and Shimon Prokupecz, CNN
updated 6:09 AM EST, Thu December 4, 2014

Source: CNN AP
STORY HIGHLIGHTS
NEW: "Make a statement, but make it in peace," says Eric Garner's mother
Protesters gather across New York, other U.S. cities
Garner, an unarmed black man, died after a white police officer put him in a chokehold
A grand jury decided not to indict the officer; AG Holder announces an investigation
New York (CNN) -- Protesters poured onto the streets of New York late Wednesday, upset over a grand jury's decision not to indict a police officer in the death of Eric Garner.
They marched at the same time U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder announced that federal officials were moving ahead with a civil rights investigation.
Garner, an unarmed black man, died in July after a white officer, Daniel Pantaleo, put him in a chokehold. Garner's death was later ruled a homicide.
"This fight ain't over. It just begun. I'm determined to get justice for my husband because he shouldn't have been killed in that way. He shouldn't have been killed in any way," said Esaw Garner, his widow.
"He should be here, celebrating Christmas and Thanksgiving and everything else, with his children and his grandchildren. And he can't. Why? Because a cop did wrong. Somebody that gets paid to do right did wrong and he's not held accountable for it. But my husband's death will not be in vain. As long as I have a breath in my body I will fight the fight till the end."
Protesters gathered at various points in Manhattan, including Times Square and Union Square, marching peacefully north as crowds formed near Rockefeller Center for the lighting of the Christmas tree. Columbus Circle was blocked for a time.
There were demonstrations in other cities too, including Washington, D.C., Philadelphia and Oakland, California.
"No Justice. No peace," protesters chanted in New York. "No racist police."
Garner's mother, who spoke alongside his widow, said she was disappointed by the grand jury's decision. She called for calm.
"We want you to rally, but rally in peace. Make a statement, but make it in peace," said Gwen Carr.
On New York City's West Side Highway, a group of protesters stood face to face with rows of police officers, shouting, "I can't breathe, I can't breathe."
The protesters sat down on the road, crying out, "What do we want? Justice. When do we want it? Now!"
"Ferguson is Everywhere," one demonstrator's sign read, referring to the Michael Brown shooting in Ferguson, Missouri.
'I can't breathe'
During the fatal encounter July 17 on Staten Island, Garner raised both hands in the air and told the officers not to touch him. Seconds later, a video shows an officer behind Garner grab him in a chokehold and pull him to the sidewalk, rolling him onto his stomach. The New York City Police Department prohibits chokeholds.
"I can't breathe! I can't breathe!" Garner said repeatedly, his cries muffled into the pavement.
 Chokehold victim\'s family, friends protest Chokehold victim's family, friends protest
 Obama: We must strengthen trust NY police officer: We are all saddened Ben Crump: Hard now to defend the system
Garner, 43, was pronounced dead that day. Police had suspected Garner of selling cigarettes illegally.
The grand jury was made up of 14 white and nine nonwhite members, according to law enforcement sources. A total of 12 jurors who have heard all the evidence must be in agreement for a decision. The grand jury found that there was no "reasonable cause" to indict.
The case became emblematic of longstanding tensions between police and minority communities, especially given that the majority of people stopped under the former "stop-and-frisk" police policy were African-American or Hispanic.
A federal court ruled that stop-and-frisk was unconstitutional and tantamount to racial profiling.
The Garner death led to demonstrations around the city and came weeks before the racially charged police shooting of Brown, who was unarmed, in Ferguson.
'National moment of grief"
President Barack Obama said the Garner case reflected a longtime "concern on the part of too many minority communities that law enforcement is not working with them, and dealing with them in a fair way."
"We are not going to let up until we see a strengthening of the trust, and a strengthening of the accountability that exists between our communities and our law enforcement," he said.
Standing outside the Staten Island store where his son was put into a fatal chokehold, Garner's father, Ben, told a crowd that he was hopeful about the federal investigation and urged demonstrators to remain peaceful.
"We want justice for Eric," he said. "We ain't tearing up nothing. We ain't burning up nothing... The police is our problem. No violence. That is all I ask."
Mayor Bill de Blasio sought to allay tensions, saying that he had received assurances from Washington that the federal investigation of Garner's death would move forward "expeditiously and with a clear sense of independence."
De Blasio said the grand jury decision has created "a national moment of pain, a national moment of grief and searching for a solution."
Pantaleo, according to a statement from his union, the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, said: "I became a police officer to help people and to protect those who can't protect themselves. It is never my intention to harm anyone and I feel very bad about the death of Mr. Garner. My family and I include him and his family in our prayers and I hope that they will accept my personal condolences for their loss."
Staten Island District Attorney Daniel Donovan Jr. said the grand jury conducted dozens of interviews with witnesses, including 22 civilians, and met between September 29 and December 3. An attorney for Pantaleo said his client testified for approximately two hours on November 21 in front of the grand jury.
U.S. Rep. Hakeem Jeffries, who represents parts of Brooklyn and Queens, called the decision "a miscarriage of justice" an "outrage" and a "disgrace."
"He was killed in plain sight for all of America to see because this was captured on video. And so it's inexplicable that this grand jury could not return a single charge," said Jeffries.
Patrolmen's Benevolent Association President Patrick Lynch said, "there are no winners" from the grand jury decision.
"It is clear that the officer's intention was to do nothing more than take Mr. Garner into custody as instructed and that he used the take-down technique that he learned in the academy when Mr. Garner refused," Lynch said. "No police officer starts a shift intending to take another human being's life and we are all saddened by this tragedy."
Brown and Garner
The grand jury's decision came on the same day that the New York Police Department, in an attempt to bolster public confidence, announced plans to start having some officers wear body cameras.
"When something happens, to have a video record of it, from the police officers' perspective, is going to help in many, many ways," de Blasio told reporters. "And God forbid, when something goes wrong, we are going to have a clearer understanding of what happened."
 Ex-cop explains NYC 'chokehold ban' Toobin: Chokehold not illegal Demonstrating a banned chokehold
Parallels mark the deaths of Garner and Brown, both black, starting with crimes they were suspected of: Brown allegedly stole cigars from a convenience store; Garner was allegedly selling cigarettes tax-free.
Another similarity that has become the hallmark of protests in Ferguson: Garner put his hands up in the air, as the crook of Pantaleo's elbow tightened around his throat. Some eyewitnesses have said Brown also made that gesture in surrender. But other witnesses contradicted them.
No video was rolling, so doubts over that and other details will always hang over the moment that former Ferguson Police Officer Darren Wilson shot the unarmed teen.
That has led Obama to call for law officers all over the country to record their operations with body cameras.
In Garner's case, there can be little doubt what happened.
Before he gasped what appeared to be his final breaths, someone hit record on a cell phone camera. The details of his takedown spread through the Internet as the video went viral.
Wilson and Pantaleo
In the Ferguson case, Wilson argued before the Missouri grand jury that he shot Brown -- who Wilson said tried to wrest away his gun and then charged at him -- in self-defense.
In the Staten Island cell phone video, Garner did not go after Pantaleo but had his back to him; the officer jumped him from behind then tackled him to the ground.
The New York Medical Examiner has ruled Garner's death a homicide. The cause of death was "compression of neck (chokehold), compression of chest and prone positioning during physical restraint by police."
But the medical examiner also listed acute and chronic bronchial asthma, obesity and hypertensive cardiovascular disease as contributing factors in Garner's death.
In Ferguson, Wilson went into hiding after death threats and kept his status of police officer but was placed on leave. He resigned shortly after the grand jury decision. After the chokehold, Pantaleo was put on modified assignment and stripped of his badge and gun amid the investigation, and the NYPD's commissioner ordered an extensive review of training procedures.
Two lawsuits have previously been filed against Pantaleo. The plaintiffs in both suits allege false arrest, unlawful imprisonment, civil rights violations and other charges.
One suit from 2013 was dismissed in January 2014, while the second, from February 2014, remains open.
Ferguson and New York
In both Ferguson and New York, mostly African-American protesters took to the streets for weeks after both men died to decry police violence.
Demonstrators in New York have called the police response during Garner's arrest excessive and criminal, but during protests, the contact between police and demonstrators has been largely cordial.
Missing were the tear gas canisters, assault rifles, armored vehicles and the lootings and flying bottles that marred the St. Louis suburb in the wake of Brown's death.
When the Missouri grand jury declined to charge Wilson, violence returned to Ferguson, as shot were fired, stores were looted and cars were set on fire.

[CNN]

Why quibbling about the cause of Eric Garner’s death completely misses the point
Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on LinkedIn Share via Email More Options
Resize Text Print Article Comments 27
By Roberto A. Ferdman December 3 at 8:51 PM  
 
A 400- pound asthmatic Eric Garner died while being arrested by police in Staten Island. (Photo By: /NY Daily News via Getty Images)
For the second time in as many weeks, a grand jury decided not to indict a police officer for the use of excessive force. This time, however, the weapon of choice was not a gun, but a set of hands, used in an apparent chokehold on an asthmatic Staten Island man named Eric Garner — a tactic that, as it turns out, is forbidden by the NYPD.

This is what the NYPD patrol guide says, per the New York Law Journal:

Members of the New York City Police Department will NOT use chokeholds. A chokehold shall include, but is not limited to, any pressure to the throat or windpipe, which may prevent or hinder breathing or reduce intake of air.

That's explicit. And it has been the department's policy since 1993, shortly after five officers were put on trial (four of whom were acquitted) for killing a 21-year-old by "traumatic asphyxia."

In fact, the NYPD has been warning officers, at least in writing, about the dangers of using chokeholds for decades. In 1985, according to the law journal, then-police commissioner Benjamin Ward limited their use, mandating that they not be used "routinely," and disallowing their use unless an "officer's life is in danger or some other person's life in danger and the choke hold is the least dangerous alternative method of restraint available to the police officer."

But even though the limitation on chokeholds by New York City police officers went from seldom to never, police officers appear to have continuously used the maneuver.

Between June 2013 and July 2014, the Civilian Complaint Review Board, an independent city agency that examines accusations of police misconduct, received more than 200 chokehold complaints. Extend the period back to 2009, and the total number soars into the 1000s. Nearly 200 complaints have been filed on average each year since 2001.



That's not to say that every complaint -- or even the majority -- represented a verified incident in which someone was put in a chokehold by a cop. Indeed, roughly half of claims have been found by the review board to be unsubstantiated. Only a tiny fraction -- around 2 percent -- have been substantiated. A substantial number of cases, meanwhile, are neither fully proven nor disproved.

But even if a minority of cases involve chokeholds, it raises an important question: Why are police officers in New York City still allegedly using the maneuver if it is explicitly banned?

The answer might be because the department is not enforcing the rule stringently. A recent study (pdf) by the review board says that:

Put simply, during the last decade, the NYPD disciplinary decisions in NYPD administrative trials of chokehold allegations failed to enforce the clear mandate of the Patrol Guide chokehold rule. In response to these decisions which failed to hold offending officers accountable, the CCRB and NYPD Department Advocate’s Office [internal affairs] failed to charge officers with chokehold violations pursuant to the mandate of the Patrol Guide chokehold rule.

By failing to properly punish officers who have used a banned method of apprehension, the department effectively shapes the understanding of the rule by officers, the study says.

In essence, in their respective charging decisions, the CCRB and the Department Advocate redefined a “chokehold” to require force to the neck during which an officer actually and substantially interfered with a complainant’s breathing rather than “pressure” to the neck which “may” interfere with breathing. In this respect the chokehold rule “mutated” to adapt to the NYPD disciplinary process, rather than the disciplinary process following the NYPD rule.

Defenders of the officer involved say he was using a proper technique -- one he had learned in the academy that stays away from a person's throat and neck. The New York City medical examiner's office has called Garner's death a homicide resulting from "compression of chest and prone positioning during physical restraint by police.”

Still, it's clear that the police have not closely followed a rule that requires that they "stay away from the neck." It's possible that a lighter and less-asthmatic man might have survived the apparent chokehold -- as some police officers argue -- but that is not the point.

[Washington Post]

Eric Garner: grand jury declines to indict NYPD officer over chokehold death
Lawyer ‘astonished’ as New York police officer will not face charges over death of Eric Garner in chokehold that was caught on camera

Follow all the latest reaction in our live blog
Share 4873


inShare
2
Email
Lauren Gambino
Follow @LGamGam Follow @GuardianUS
theguardian.com, Wednesday 3 December 2014 22.43 GMT
Family of Eric Garner 
The family of Eric Garner address a New York rally. Photograph: Don Emmert/AFP/Getty Images
More than four months after an unarmed black man died in a chokehold during an arrest by a New York police officer, the criminal case against the officers involved in his death has collapsed with a special grand jury decision not bring charges, according to an attorney for the victim’s family.

The Associated Press quoted Jonathon Moore, who represents Eric Garner’s family, saying he was “astonished by the decision”.

The decision comes after racial tensions reached fever pitch in Missouri, the scene of violence and rioting after a grand jury declined to bring charges against a white police office in the killing of Michael Brown, an unarmed black teenager. His death sparked hundreds of protests across the country and snapped into focus seething race issues.

Only 17 July, police stopped the heavy-set father of six on Staten Island under suspicion of peddling untaxed “loose” cigarettes. Garner had been arrested previously for selling untaxed cigarettes, marijuana possession and false impersonation.

A video shot by a bystander shows Garner resisting arrest as a plainclothes officer attempts to to handcuff him. Backing away from the officer, Garner tells him: “This stops today,” which has become a rallying cry for protesters in New York.


A struggle ensues. Eight-year NYPD veteran Daniel Pantaleo responds by putting his arm around Garner’s neck in a chokehold – banned under police policy – and wrestling the asthmatic man to the ground with the aid of several officers. Garner gasps “I can’t breathe” until his 350lb body goes limp. He was later pronounced dead at a hospital.

Speaking at Garner’s funeral in July, the Rev Al Sharpton urged a federal civil rights investigation, and argued for charges to be brought against the officer.

“Let’s not play games with this one. You don’t need no training to stop choking a man saying ‘I can’t breathe’,” Sharpton shouted to a packed church. “You don’t need no cultural orientation to stop choking a man saying ‘I can’t breathe.’ You need to be prosecuted.”

Garner’s death touched off protests and rallies across the city. Weeks later, the city’s medical examiner ruled Garner’s death a homicide, heightening calls for criminal charges. The autopsy findings said Garner died as a result of the chokehold, compressions to his chest and prone positioning during his restraint by police.

Pantaleo was stripped of his gun and badge while an investigation takes place; the actions of the other officers and emergency responders involved in the incident were also examined.

Tensions had been simmering all week as New Yorkers braced for the verdict, delivered ahead of the anticipated grand jury decision on whether to bring charges against the officer who killed Michael Brown in Ferguson.

Activists called for a day of action following the verdict to protest the decision not to pursue charges against Pantaleo. Protesters are also demanding an end to a policing philosophy championed by NYPD commissioner William Bratton. The policing model, known as “broken windows,” emphasizes attention to petty crime – such as selling untaxed cigarettes – as means of stymying more serious crime.

The decision may compound already frayed relations between the New York police department and minority communities, which Bratton and the city’s mayor, Bill de Blasio, pledged to repair.

The NYPD outlawed chokeholds over two decades ago, exactly because they can be deadly if administered inappropriately or carelessly. Still, between January 2009 and June 2014, the city’s Civilian Complaint Review Board, an independent agency that investigates police misconduct, received 1,128 civilian complaints involving chokehold allegations. Of these, only a small fraction of the cases are ever substantiated – just ten during the five and a half year window.

In the days after Garner’s death, Bratton said all 35,000 officers would be retrained on the department’s use of force policy.

The family has sued the city and the police department, as well as several officers involved in the incident.

[The Guardian]
