Obama Wants To Help Buy 50,000 Body Cameras For The Nation's 630,000 Police Officers
Posted: 12/01/2014 7:28 pm EST Updated: 12/01/2014 10:59 pm EST

Share
1232
Tweet
257
 
Email
25
Comment
149
Share on Google+
The White House announced Monday that President Barack Obama will sign an executive order meant to improve training for local law enforcement agencies that receive equipment through federal grant programs. Among the proposed initiatives is a 3-year, $263 million investment package, of which $75 million would go toward covering half the cost of 50,000 officer-mounted cameras -- a technology that has been widely cited as a necessary police reform following the death of Michael Brown, an unarmed black teenager shot and killed by Ferguson, Missouri police officer Darren Wilson in August.

Monday's announcement was greeted by some as a victory for transparency in law enforcement. Yet with almost 630,000 police officers working nationwide, it's not clear how much of an effect even 50,000 cameras would have.

Body cameras have long been a popular proposal among police reform advocates, who say that documenting interactions between officers and civilians can help to eliminate bias and uncertainty regarding alleged misconduct by either party. One frequently cited pilot program in Rialto, California, found that between 2012 and 2013, in the first year of the city using police cameras, the number of complaints filed against officers fell by 88 percent and use of force by officers fell by almost 60 percent.

Despite resistance from some police officials and union members who have called the cameras an unnecessary distraction for officers, departments in major cities like Chicago, New York, Minneapolis and Washington, D.C., as well as smaller cities like Ferguson, have started using cameras, or have at least announced plans to do so.

Obama's $75 million program, which still requires congressional approval, would seek to ease the financial burden of outfitting police officers with cameras by providing a 50 percent funding match to states and localities that decide to participate. (Individual cameras cost between $300 and $400, on top of which are the costs associated with storing and maintaining the data recorded by the devices.) But with no ability to compel local police departments to get behind this move, the administration must simply hope that enough law enforcement volunteers are willing to join the program.

In addition -- as the Police Executive Research Forum presented to the Department of Justice in a 2014 report -- there are still plenty of concerns from both the law enforcement and civil rights communities about how, exactly, a large-scale police camera program would be implemented. Which interactions, for example, would be recorded? How would the review process work? Such questions are further complicated by state laws that differ on when and where people may be recorded, as well as how such recordings may be stored and accessed by the public.

Monday also saw the release of a White House review on the programs that provide military equipment to local police departments -- a project first undertaken in August in response to criticism over militarized police behavior in Ferguson. It's difficult to ignore the sheer difference in scale between Obama's proposed police camera program and the sum of all federal grant programs to local law enforcement. In the past five years, grants from five different federal agencies have totaled about $18 billion -- money that has gone toward everything from office supplies to mine-resistant armored vehicles, or MRAPs, fit for the battlefield.

A recent review of a handful of MRAPs given to local law enforcement agencies found that the federal government had spent $5.7 million on these types of vehicles in New York state alone. The administration's report documented a total of 617 MRAPs and 616 aircraft among the 460,000 total pieces of controlled property currently maintained by local police forces.

In its announcement Monday, the White House noted a "lack of consistency" in how these federal grants have been implemented. Yet at the same time, the White House review claims the programs have been useful, and provides no suggestions for repealing or significantly restructuring them. Instead, the administration plans to focus more generally on improving "training" and accountability, as well as signing an additional executive order to create a Task Force on 21st Century Policing. This group will examine "how to promote effective crime reduction while building public trust," and will organize its findings in a report for the president within 90 days.

[Huffington]

Obama Requests $263 Million for Police Body Cameras, Training

Obama Calls Calls for Police Body Cameras in Wake of FergusonNIGHTLY NEWS
 
 
 
President Barack Obama on Monday proposed new funding meant to help improve relations between police departments and minority communities, saying there is a "simmering distrust" between the two groups that extends well beyond the unrest in Ferguson, Missouri.

The White House has asked for $263 million in funding for police body cameras and training in the wake of the shooting death of unarmed 18-year-old Michael Brown.

The program, which would need congressional approval, would offer a total of $75 million over three years to match state funding for the cameras by 50 percent, helping to pay for more than 50,000 of the devices.

The announcement came as Obama held a series of meetings with law enforcement personnel, civil rights leaders and Cabinet officials to discuss possible reforms to ease mistrust towards police, particularly in minority communities.

"This is not a problem just of Ferguson, Missouri. This is a national problem," Obama said.

The administration also said Monday that it will not make major changes to a program that transfers military equipment to state and local law enforcement agencies, but will instead focus on better oversight, transparency and training to ensure that the equipment is used properly. The president did say he would work to ensure the United States is not building a "militarized culture" in its police forces.

Obama will also announce the creation of a new task force - led by Philadelphia Police Commissioner Charles H. Ramsey and former Office of Justice Programs AG Laurie Robinson - to prepare recommendations for "21st century policing."

Obama acknowledged the inaction of previously assembled task forces, but pledged to "follow through" in his remaining two years as president.

"This time will be different because the president of the United States is deeply vested in making it different," he said.

[NBC]

Obama announces funding for 50,000 police body cameras
By Russell Brandom  on December 1, 2014 01:20 pm  Email @russellbrandom 
213
DON'T MISS STORIES FOLLOW THE VERGE  Like   Follow   Subscribe    Follow
 Share on Facebook (36k)  Tweet (4,390)  Share  Share (71)  Pin 	
In an announcement today, the White House has pledged $263 million in new federal funding for police training and body cameras, set aside by executive order. The money includes $75 million allocated specifically for the purchase of 50,000 cameras for law enforcement officers across the country. The training portion of the funds would go toward instructing police in the responsible use of paramilitary equipment like assault rifles and armored personnel carriers, much of which has flooded local departments as a result of a Homeland Security preparedness program. Additional funds will go to fund police outreach programs designed to build trust between local departments and the communities they serve.

$263 MILLION IN NEW FEDERAL FUNDING

The cameras are designed to provide a definitive record of police activities, and have become a frequent demand in the wake of the Ferguson protests. The protests began with the death of Michael Brown, an unarmed teenager killed by the police in Ferguson. Community leaders pointed to video taken in the aftermath of Brown's death as evidence of police misconduct, and the subsequent outcry has triggered a Justice Department investigation. More recently, a widely shared video of Cleveland police shooting a 12-year-old named Tamir Rice has intensified the demand for video documentation of police activities. Last week, the parents of Michael Brown announced a campaign "to ensure that every police officer working the streets in this country wears a body camera."

The new funding push is substantial, but 50,000 cameras will cover only a fraction of the more than 750,000 police officers currently employed in America. Camera proposals have also run into trouble with public records laws in states like Washington, which require the release of all police records not actively tied up in an investigation. With hundreds of hours of video generated by police cameras every day, that would present serious problems for both privacy and simple logistics.

Still, many police departments have already looked into body-mounted cameras. On October 1st, the Washington D.C. police began a six-month pilot program that put cameras on the shoulders of many local police, and officials expect the program to reduce the number of complaints filed against officers by as much as 80 percent. The program wasn't cheap: it cost $1 million to buy and store the necessary volume of cameras. But after today, other departments that decide to take the same leap will have federal matching funds to soften the blow.

[The Verge]

Obama proposes $263 million plan that will put body-worn cameras on police officers and reviews police 'militarization' as he meets Al Sharpton at the White House
Slain 18-year-old Michael Brown's parents have demanded the use of more body-cams by police forces to document violent encounters with suspects 
President met with 'young ... civil rights leaders' and law enforcement officials after he holds a cabinet meeting about the Ferguson unrest
Civil rights meeting focused on challenges posed by 'mistrust between law enforcement and communities of color'
Speculation ran rampant that Al Sharpton would be in the White House Monday, and his representatives confirmed it before lunch
Cabinet meeting concerned the militarization of local law enforcement with equipment provided by the federal government
Task force has four months to make recommendations to Obama about how to change the program that has moved $5.1 billion in gear
By DAVID MARTOSKO, US POLITICAL EDITOR FOR MAILONLINE  
PUBLISHED: 08:59 GMT, 1 December 2014 | UPDATED: 23:27 GMT, 1 December 2014
     
1.8k
shares
261
View comments
President Barack Obama met with controversial black pastor Rev. Al Sharpton on Monday at the White House, amid word that he would demand $263 million from Congress to put 50,000 body-worn cameras in U.S. police departments and train local cops to better use surplus military equipment.
The moves came in response to the police shooting of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Missouri.
Sharpton called the get-together 'a historic meeting that the president and vice president sat with all of us and law enforcement to commit to not just another commitment, another study ... but that he would put his full weight behind it.'
'We live in a country that we must support law enforcement but law enforcement must support justice,' he said. 
In a brief statement to the press, Obama said that the Brown shooting in Ferguson 'laid bare a problem that is not unique to St. Louis ... and that is a simmering distrust that exists between too many police departments and too many communities of color.'
'He cited civil rights leaders' opinion 'that in a country where one of our basic principles, perhaps the most important principle, is equality under the law, that too many individuals – particularly young people of color – do not feel as if they're being treated fairly.'
SCROLL DOWN FOR VIDEOS
President Barack Obama had a full plate on Monday with three separate Ferguson-related meetings, including one with elected officials, community organizers and religious leaders
+6
President Barack Obama had a full plate on Monday with three separate Ferguson-related meetings, including one with elected officials, community organizers and religious leaders

+6
Rev. Al Sharpton spoke Sunday during a church service in the parking lot at The Flood Christian Church, a house of worship that rioters burned last week in the wake of a grand jury's decision not to indict a white police officer in the shooting death of a black man
ALREADY THERE? Members of the Ferguson, MIssouri Police Department wore body cameras during an August 30 rally
+6
ALREADY THERE? Members of the Ferguson, MIssouri Police Department wore body cameras during an August 30 rally
Brown's parents have pushed body-worn cameras as one way to limit distrust between police and criminal suspects following physical encounters. The White House said in August that it agreed with the idea in principle.
'We support the use of cameras and video technology by law enforcement officers, and the Department of Justice continues to research best practices for implementation,' the administration wrote in response to a public petition that attracted more than 154,000 supporters on the White House website.
The new initiative will provide 50 per cent of the funding for cameras, but will not pay for them entirely, at a cost of $75 million.
It will also provide new training resources and funds to study how to reform police practices.
It's unclear why Officer Darren Wilson didn't wear a camera during his fateful encounter with Brown. Members of the Ferguson Police Department were photographed wearing body cameras later that month during an August 30 rally.
Obama has a jam-packed day with three separate meetings to discuss the deteriorating situation. 
He also announced Monday that he wants the Pentagon and Congress to review the program that puts surplus military hardware in the hands of state and local law enforcement. 
RELATED ARTICLES
Previous
1
2
Next

'I'm thankful I'm here to see the world and my kids':...

Rev Al Sharpton delivers sermon at Michael Brown’s church,...

Gang of teens beat St Louis motorist to death with hammers...

Footage shows elderly man attacked with his own oxygen...

Rams players should be PUNISHED for 'hands up' Ferguson...

REVEALED: Darren Wilson resigned without severance pay from...

Former New York mayor Rudy Giuliani courts more controversy...

Michael Brown’s family may sue Darren Wilson after ‘flawed’...
SHARE THIS ARTICLE
Share
1.8k shares
The White House is pushing a new torrent of public messages about the death of Brown, a young black man, at the hands of Wilson, a white officer.
Meetings with cabinet officials, with a group of 'young local and national civil rights leaders,' and with top law enforcement officials are on the president's official Monday schedule.
Speculation ran rampant on Twitter that Sharpton would attend the civil rights meeting, and his representatives confirmed it just before lunch.
Sharpton, a community-organizer-turned-minister-turned-TV-host, is a frequent White House visitor and has appeared in Ferguson. On Sunday he preached at the St. Louis church where Michael Brown's funeral service was held.
'The fight ain't over,' he told a capacity crowd.
Alicia Garza, a special projects director at the National Domestic Workers Alliance and a co-founder of the emblematic 'Black Lives Matter' movement, tweeted a cautionary note.
'Obama – meeting with Al Sharpton isn't what's going to change conditions. Those days are LONG GONE,' she wrote.
Paramilitary: Police in the war-torn Missouri suburb of Ferguson, like many local forces large and small, participates in a federal program that arms them with surplus battlefield weapons, armor and combat vehicles
+6
Paramilitary: Police in the war-torn Missouri suburb of Ferguson , like many local forces large and small, participates in a federal program that arms them with surplus battlefield weapons, armor and combat vehicles
Missouri Lt. Gov Peter Kinder said Monday morning on the Fox News Channel that Sharpton 'is an inciter of mobs and he demands mob justice.'
The Pentagon program that supplies military equipment to police forces has moved more than $5.1 billion in gear – including guns, tactical vehicles and even aircraft – since its inception. About $500 million in hardware was passed out this year alone. 
But White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest explained during a briefing Monday that 'the ‘majority of the funds’ spent through those programs ‘has not been used to purchase law enforcement specific equipment’. 
He characterized it instead as largely a source for office supplies and other materials that can help a police department run smoothly.
Earnest told reporters that the program should be tweaked to 'enhance crime prevention while at the same time strengthening the bonds with the communities they are sworn to protect.'
He said the president had no plans to visit Ferguson personally but hadn't ruled it out. 
Obama: We should reexamine militarization of police

Black communities, especially in Ferguson, have complained that the federal government is arming their local police to the point where they more resemble paramilitary armies than law enforcement agencies.
But on the nights following a grand jury's decision not to indict Officer Wilson, rioters burned buildings and looted stores while shots rang out. Missouri Gov. Jay Nixon was criticized later for not deploying the Missouri National Guard, a fully militarized force, in downtown Ferguson.
Obama said during an August 18 press conference that it would be 'useful for us to review how the funding was done, how local law enforcement has used grant dollars, to make sure that what they're purchasing is stuff that they actually need.'
'There is a big difference between our military and our local law enforcement, and we don't want those lines blurred. That would be contrary to our tradition,' he said then. 
Earnest said Monday that the president would appoint a new task force, led by Philadelphia Police Commissioner Charles Ramsey and former assistant Attorney General Laurie Robinson, to study what the White House has called 'best practices' in policing.
That task force will have 120 days to report back to the White House. Its work is expected to focus on alleged disparities between the treatment of blacks and whites at the hands of sworn officers.
Military weapons and armor have crossed over from Army bases to police barracks tens of thousands of times in the last seven years, including firearms and anti-ambush vehicles
+6
Military weapons and armor have crossed over from Army bases to police barracks tens of thousands of times in the last seven years, including firearms and anti-ambush vehicles
Rioters in Ferguson set police car ablaze during protests

The White House said in a statement that the president's cabinet meeting would concern 'federal programs and funding that provide equipment to state and local law enforcement agencies.'
But it did not respond to a request for information about who else, other than Sharpton, would attend its civil rights meeting.
The Associated Press reported that Obama's meeting with the civil rights community would focus on challenges posed by 'mistrust between law enforcement and communities of color.' 
That topic was a major point of emphasis when the president addressed the nation one week ago as Ferguson burned.
'The fact is, in too many parts of this country, a deep distrust exists between law enforcement and communities of color,' Obama said on Nov. 24. 
'Some of this is the result of the legacy of racial discrimination in this country. And this is tragic, because nobody needs good policing more than poor communities with higher crime rates.'
'The good news is we know there are things we can do to help,' he added. 'And I've instructed Attorney General [Eric] Holder to work with cities across the country to help build better relations between communities and law enforcement.' 
Earnest said Monday that it's ‘an unfortunate irony that in those communities where the crime rate is the highest, sometimes the trust is lowest between the members of the community and the police force.’ 
Michael Brown Sr., left, and his wife, Calvina Brown, right, attended a Flood Christian Church service on Sunday in a tent. The church was torched during riots last week. Sharpton preached at the service.
+6
Michael Brown Sr., left, and his wife, Calvina Brown, right, attended a Flood Christian Church service on Sunday in a tent. The church was torched during riots last week. Sharpton preached at the service.
Sharpton: We lost the first round in Ferguson but the fight isn't...

Protests have continued in Ferguson, but have been more muted than the violence sparked last week by a grand jury's decision not to indict police officer Darren Wilson in the shooting of 18-year-old Michael Brown after he held up a convenience store. 
Wilson resigned his post over the weekend. 
Obama's cabinet meeting concerned 'federal programs and funding that provide equipment to state and local law enforcement agencies,' according to the White House.
That has been a front-burner issue since the Ferguson shooting in August, when police showed up in force in military-style vehicles that the Obama and Bush administrations provided through programs that distribute surplus Pentagon equipment. 


Read more: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2855715/Obama-proposes-cop-cams-reviews-militarized-police-meets-Al-Sharpton-White-House.html#ixzz3KyUkw44l 
Follow us: @MailOnline on Twitter | DailyMail on Facebook

[Daily Mail]

White House urges body cameras for police after Ferguson
Published December 01, 2014FoxNews.com
Facebook2219 Twitter529 livefyre1216 Email Print

NOW PLAYING
Obama proposes spending package for police body cams
Never autoplay videos
The White House is pushing a multi-million-dollar program to encourage local law enforcement agencies to use body cameras, on the heels of the police shooting of 18-year-old Michael Brown in Ferguson, Mo. 

At the same time, President Obama is not seeking to pull back federal programs that provide military-style equipment to local law enforcement.

The administration revealed details of a White House review after Obama met with members of his Cabinet about the situation. The president is pushing a three-year, $263 million program to expand training and resources for local police departments -- the biggest component would be a $75 million fund during that period to help purchase 50,000 body cameras. 

The proposed Body Worn Camera Partnership Program would give a 50 percent match to state and local police forces that purchase small, lapel-mounted cameras to record police on the job. The White House has said the cameras could help bridge mistrust between law enforcement and the public. 

Obama's Cabinet meeting also focused on his administration's review of federal programs that provide military-style equipment to law enforcement agencies. 

The White House review found a "lack of consistency" in how these programs are structured. But on a conference call, senior administration officials offered no explicit position on the program. 

Senior administration officials said that five federal agencies have programs to supply the equipment that are authorized by Congress, but Obama's focus is not supporting legislation to repeal them but to make sure there are standards to make sure the equipment is used safely. 

Obama's staff is drafting an executive order that will require federal agencies that run the programs to work with law enforcement and civil rights and civil liberties organizations to recommend changes.

The president was making the announcement Monday from the White House during a series of meetings with his Cabinet, civil rights leaders, law enforcement officials and others. At least for now, Obama is staying away from Ferguson in the wake of a racially charged uproar over a grand jury's decision last week not to charge the police offer who fatally shot unarmed Michael Brown. 

Demands for police to wear the cameras have increased across the country since Brown's death. Some officers in the St. Louis suburb have since started wearing the cameras, and the New York Police department became the largest department in the U.S. to adopt the technology when it launched a pilot program in early September. 

A report from the Justice Department, which had been in the works before the Ferguson shooting, said there's evidence both police and civilians behave better when they know there are cameras around. The report also cites how footage from the cameras can be used to train officers. 

Obama also plans to sign an executive order to create a Task Force on 21st Century Policing, which will include law enforcement and community leaders. The purpose would be to examine how to reduce crime while maintaining public trust through measures like increased police training. The task force is being co-chaired by Philadelphia Police Commissioner Charles H. Ramsey and Laurie Robinson, a professor at George Mason University and former assistant attorney general at the Justice Department.

[Fox News]
