Vladimir Putin allegedly gave UEFA President Michel Platini a Picasso in exchange for a FIFA World Cup vote
Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on Google Plus Share via Email More Options
Resize Text Print Article Comments 17
By Marissa Payne December 1  
 
Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin, right, shares a totally non-sketchy handshake with FIFA President Sepp Blatter after Russia was announced as the host for the 2018 soccer World Cup in Zurich. (Kurt Schorrer/AP)
Russian President Vladimir Putin allegedly offered a Picasso painting to UEFA president Michel Platini in exchange for World Cup votes, according to a new report from The Sunday Times. The allegations are being made by England’s 2018 World Cup bid committee, which, according to the Sunday Times, gathered intelligence “from a network of British embassies and private intelligence firms staffed by former MI6 officers” over the course of two years about the Russian bid. The information was then revealed in “a dossier published by parliament.”

If true, the contents of the report are damning for Russia. The Sunday Times writes:

It reports how England’s bid officials were warned that Vladimir Putin, then the Russian prime minister, had “cranked up . . . the operation” months before the secret ballot and was alleged to have tasked a trusted cabal of oligarchs with doing “deniable” deals to win the support of FIFA voters.

Some of those “deniable” acts, according to the Sunday Times, included the handing out of high-priced art to FIFA voters, including a painting believed to be by Pablo Picasso to UEFA’s Platini and an additional landscape painting to FIFA voting member Michel D’Hooghe of Belgium. The latter painting was said to be wrapped in a paper bag and given to D’Hooghe by Vyacheslav Koloskov, a former FIFA vice president and Russia 2018 World Cup committee member.

D’Hooghe, who is reportedly being investigated along with four others by FIFA in a new corruption probe connected to the World Cup bids, confirmed the receipt of the painting to the Sunday Times, but noted he thought it held no monetary value. He also said it was “absolutely ugly” and added that he did not vote for Russia to win the 2018 bid.

Platini, however, denies the allegation that he was given a Picasso painting from Putin.

“Allegations in the Sunday Times relating to my actions in the 2018 and 2022 bidding processes are total fabrications,” Platini told CNN. “The matter has now been passed to my legal advisers.”

Officials from Russia’s bid committee also denied any wrongdoing, telling CNN in a statement:

“Russia 2018 categorically rejects all of the allegations made in the Sunday Times today as entirely unfounded speculation.

“These allegations are not new, but the evidence has only ever indicated that Russia 2018 behaved professionally and fairly throughout the bidding process.

“The Russia 2018 Bid Committee operated in full compliance with the spirit and letter of FIFA’s Code of Ethics, and sought to abide by the FIFA bidding guidelines at all times.

“This kind of speculation will not affect Russia 2018′s focus on doing what we have been doing for nearly four years already: making great progress towards our objective of hosting the best ever FIFA World Cup in 2018.”

The Sunday Times report comes less than a month after FIFA released a summary of the findings from an independent investigation into corruption behind the 2018 and 2022 World Cup bids. The summary cleared both Russia and the 2022 winner Qatar of any wrongdoing, but found improprieties in the losing bids of England (which lost to Russia) and Australia (which lost to Qatar).

[Washinton Post]

World Cup bids corruption: 'Picasso painting offered as kickback'
By Paul Gittings, CNN
December 1, 2014 -- Updated 1426 GMT (2226 HKT)
A published report claims UEFA president Michel Platini was gifted a Picasso painting in return for support for the Russia 2018 World Cup bid. Platini strenuously denies the allegation. A published report claims UEFA president Michel Platini was gifted a Picasso painting in return for support for the Russia 2018 World Cup bid. Platini strenuously denies the allegation.
HIDE CAPTION
'Picasso gift'
<<
<
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
>
>>
STORY HIGHLIGHTS
Further allegations published around award of 2018 and 2022 World Cups
UK parliamentary committee reveals details of a 'secret dossier' obtained by the Sunday Times
Dossier was allegedly commissioned by failed 2018 England bid
Claims made over using priceless art as inducement by Russia 2018 bid
Follow us at @WorldSportCNN and like us on Facebook
(CNN) -- Expensive works of art offered as inducements are at the center of the latest series of damaging allegations around the bidding process for the 2018 and 2022 World Cups, a published report claimed.
A painting, believed to be a Picasso, was allegedly gifted to Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) president and FIFA executive member Michel Platini in return for his support for the eventually successful Russian bid for the 2018 global showpiece.
 Was a Picasso offered as a kickback? Winter or summer for Qatar 2022? FIFA ethics report clears Russia, Qatar
Another FIFA voting member, Michel D'Hooghe, from Belgium, was also the recipient of a landscape painting, given to him in a package wrapped in brown paper by Viacheslav Koloskov, a former Russian executive committee member working for his nation's attempt to host the 2018 tournament, it is alleged in a report in The Sunday Times.
"Allegations' in the Sunday Times relating to my actions in the 2018 and 2022 bidding processes are total fabrications," said former French international star Platini.
"The matter has now been passed to my legal advisers."
Read: Whistleblower who took on FIFA power brokers
D'Hooghe told the Sunday Times that he believed the painting given to him, was "absolutely ugly" and he believed it had no value. He said he had not voted for the Russian bid.
The newspaper's latest revelations are based on evidence it supplied to a UK parliamentary committee, which itself has been investigating the circumstances around the award of the World Cup host countries, particularly in the light of England's failed bid for the 2018 competition.
The House of Commons Culture, Media and Sport Committee (DCMS) has now published details of the investigations by the Sunday Times which claim the England bid commissioned "high-level intelligence gathering and and surveillance on the other countries bidding to host the 2018 and 2022 World Cups."
It also claims England's bid used private security companies and a former member of the UK government's intelligence service MI6 to gather information on its rivals.
Read: FIFA launches criminal cases over 2018/22 bids
The previously unreported material contains a series of claims around the role allegedly played by Russian President Vladimir Putin in making sure his country would host football's premier competition, hard on the heels of winning the rights to stage the Sochi Winter Olympics earlier this year.
It claims that Putin was initially skeptical about Russia's bid but had later thrown his full weight behind the process. "He (Putin) took a personal interest in the running of the bid in mid-2010," the committee report reveals.
Under the heading, "Intelligence relating to Russia 2018" a series of allegations are revealed about Putin's role in brokering a major bilateral trade deal for gas with Qatar, the winners of the 2022 bid, in exchange for each others votes and the votes of others of their supporters.
The allegations also detail the plundering of Russia's national art collection, either from the vaults of the State Hermitage Museum in St.Petersburg or the Kremlin archives, as alleged kickbacks to Platini and D'Hooghe.
 Racism and the World Cup Russia urged to tackle racist abuse FIFA's Blatter to seek Presidency again
In a statement given to CNN, officials behind the Russian bid have also strongly denied any wrongdoing.
"Russia 2018 categorically rejects all of the allegations made in the Sunday Times today as entirely unfounded speculation," it said.
Read: FIFA embroiled in 'civil war'
"These allegations are not new, but the evidence has only ever indicated that Russia 2018 behaved professionally and fairly throughout the bidding process.
"The Russia 2018 Bid Committee operated in full compliance with the spirit and letter of FIFA's Code of Ethics, and sought to abide by the FIFA bidding guidelines at all times.
"This kind of speculation will not affect Russia 2018's focus on doing what we have been doing for nearly four years already: making great progress towards our objective of hosting the best ever FIFA World Cup in 2018."
The alleged pivotal role of FIFA president Sepp Blatter in the bidding process is also highlighted in the published reports of the DCMS and the Sunday Times.
The claim is made that Blatter and Putin "jointly 'hit the phones' to drum up votes for Russia on the eve of the secret ballot in Zurich on December 2, 2010."
Blatter was "absolutely committed" to the Russian bid it was said.
Read: Platini breaks silence over Garcia investigation
Earlier this month, football's world governing body published a report that cleared Russia and Qatar of any wrongdoing in their winning of the hosting rights for the 2018 and 2022 World Cups.
But within hours of the announcement, Michael Garcia, the U.S. attorney who had led the investigation, went public with his disappointment at the findings, labeling them "incomplete and erroneous" and claiming that his work had been misrepresented.
The saga took a further twist when FIFA later announced it had lodged a criminal complaint in the Swiss courts into the "possible misconduct of individual persons in connection with the awarding of the hosting rights of the 2018 and 2022 World Cup."
 FIFA president Blatter controversial Former FIFA advisor: "Blatter must go" Blatter's FIFA presidency challenger
FIFA told CNN Sunday that it was unable to comment on the specific allegations in the DCMS and Sunday Times reports.
"Matters related to the 2018/2022 inquiry are solely handled by the Investigatory Chamber of the independent FIFA Ethics Committee," it said.
"Therefore we are not in a position to comment on on-going proceedings nor on names and other information circulated in the media, particularly as we do not know against which individuals and for what reasons investigations are in process nor do we know the details of what is actually in the investigation reports."
It added: "The independent Chairman of the Audit and Compliance Committee Domenico Scala is currently evaluating the matter to decide on the next steps including the compiling of relevant information from the investigation which needs to be provided to the FIFA Executive Committee.
"In parallel, the entire reports have been provided to the Swiss General Attorney. As such, FIFA has no further comment for the time-being."
Read: English FA hits back of FIFA 'corruption' claims
Meanwhile, the English Football Association also responded Sunday to the reports, claiming that the 2018 bid chairman Andy Anson and his team had fully co-operated with the original FIFA investigation.
"The Fifa Ethics Committee made specific requests and responding to these requests involved searching in excess of 500,000 documents," the Guardian newspaper reported.
"The search parameters were established with Mr Garcia's office. The documents searched included intelligence gathered by the bid team. All documents within the search parameters were disclosed."
It added that Anson had only shared with Garcia information that could be substantiated. "Everything else was hearsay, gossip and rumor," it added.
The UK Parliament is set to debate the findings of the DCMS report Monday.

[CNN]

Report: Russia gave UEFA president Michel Platini a Picasso painting in exchange for support of World Cup bid 
Platini denied to the Sunday Times of London that he received the gift, with a Russian soccer official calling the report 'ridiculous.'
BY TERI THOMPSON , NATHANIEL VINTON  NEW YORK DAILY NEWS Published: Monday, December 1, 2014, 12:41 PM Updated: Monday, December 1, 2014, 11:56 PM A A A
19
16
SHARE THIS URL

UEFA president Michel Platini denies a report by the Sunday Times of London that he was given a Picasso painting from Russia in exchange for support of the counrty’s 2018 World Cup bid.
FABRICE COFFRINI/AFP/GETTY IMAGES
UEFA president Michel Platini denies a report by the Sunday Times of London that he was given a Picasso painting from Russia in exchange for support of the counrty’s 2018 World Cup bid.
A painting by Picasso and buried Arctic gas deposits are the latest cherished prizes to figure in the corruption crisis gripping the leadership of international soccer.

According to a British report, expensive artwork became currency in a complicated international scheme that resulted in the 2018 and 2022 World Cup tournaments landing in Russia and Qatar.

The Sunday Times of London reported that it submitted information to a committee of Britain’s House of Commons, saying that influential soccer official Michel Platini of France, a member of the powerful executive committee of FIFA, soccer’s governing body, was offered a Picasso painting plucked from Russia’s national collection in return for supporting Russia’s bid.

Platini leads UEFA, the European soccer authority overseeing the Champions League. He has long been seen as a possible successor to FIFA president Sepp Blatter, who is up for re-election next year.

Platini has forcefully denied receiving the gift, calling the report a “ridiculous rumor.”

“The allegations in the Sunday Times are completely fictitious,” Platini told French news agency AFP. “This case is now in the hands of my counsel for possible libel.”

The newspaper based its report on what it says is a secret “database” that English soccer officials compiled while bidding unsuccessfully to host the 2018 tournament. The material was reportedly gathered by British embassies and former intelligence officers. It is said to outline alleged bribery and vote-trading schemes involving members of the Ex-co.

The newspaper’s journalists submitted information about their reporting to the Culture, Media and Sport Committee, and wrote that “some reports suggested” that the artwork came from the State Hermitage Museum in St. Petersburg while others came from the Kremlin archives.

“We have been told that the England bid received intelligence suggesting the Russian bid gave expensive artworks from the country’s state art collection to FIFA voters in return for pledges of support,” the newspaper said in a 15-page statement submitted to the committee.

Some reports suggest the fine art traded for support of Russia’s 2018 World Cup bid game from Russia's famed Hermitage Museum in St. Petersburg.
DMITRY LOVETSKY/AP
Some reports suggest the fine art traded for support of Russia’s 2018 World Cup bid game from Russia's famed Hermitage Museum in St. Petersburg.
“Apparently it was (Russian president Vladimir) Putin, yeah, who made a significant gift,” a source told the newspaper. “A Picasso painting.”

The sites of the 2018 and 2022 tournaments, which bring host nations billions in revenue and immeasurable political prestige, were determined in a single 2010 vote by 22 members of the Ex-co. The bidding process was rife with opportunities for bribery, kickbacks and voting pacts.

The Sunday Times of London also alleges that investigators associated with England’s unsuccessful bid for the 2018 Cup uncovered evidence that Russia and Qatar had joined forces to influence votes in a pact “seemingly brokered through a major bilateral gas cooperation agreement.”

The newspaper suggests that Qatari and Russian officials conspired to campaign for one another’s bids while simultaneously launching projects to develop gas deposits on the Yamal Peninsula in the Russian Arctic.

The new allegations have emerged as FIFA struggles to address a corruption report compiled by Michael Garcia, a former U.S. federal prosecutor who examined the 2010 vote. Garcia recently disavowed a summary of his findings that FIFA posted on its website. Garcia’s report, still unpublished, has been submitted to criminal authorities in Switzerland, where FIFA is based.

The News reported last month that the FBI and IRS took an interest in FIFA’s Ex-co, turning Chuck Blazer — the lone American on the committee in 2010 — into a cooperating witness in a federal criminal probe based in the Eastern District of New York.

Blazer met personally with Putin in the lead up to the World Cup vote, posting photographs of himself with the Russian president on his blog. Later, after FBI and IRS confronted Blazer with evidence of unpaid taxes, he agreed to go undercover for the feds, secretly recording his meetings with soccer officials during the London Olympics in 2012.

[NY Daily News]

World Cup 2018 & 2022: More bidding process corruption claims

More allegations of corruption during the bidding process to stage the World Cups in 2018 and 2022 have been made.
The House of Commons Culture Media and Sport select committee has published previously unseen material submitted to it by the Sunday Times newspaper. 
It draws on claims by senior sources that officials connected to England's bid for the 2018 World Cup ran an intelligence-gathering operation against rival nations.
Russia and Qatar won the bids.
BBC sports editor Dan Roan
"Closure for Fifa seems a long, long way off. This tawdry saga shows no sign of abating, and it shames the game - and those that run it."
Read more
This submission by the Sunday Times outlines how England 2018 executives compiled a database of rumours and intelligence - gathered by private companies and, significantly, British embassies.
There is, however, no clear evidence supplied by the paper.
Instead, its submission provides detailed accounts of how votes were allegedly bought and sold in the build-up to the December 2010 poll - and how Fifa's opaque rules for bidding nations were exploited.
The paper claims Russia's President Vladimir Putin played a major role in his country's winning bid, even, it says, enlisting Fifa's president Sepp Blatter to help lobby for votes.
Another claim suggests the Russia bid had lobbied for the support of Michel Platini - the Uefa president and voter - by giving him a painting believed to have been a Picasso.
There are also allegations about Qatar, and how its dominance in the natural gas industry helped it secure votes through bilateral trade deals.
Russia, the 2018 World Cup hosts, and Qatar, who will hold the 2022 tournament, have always denied any wrongdoing, and a recent, albeit disputed, summary of a Fifa inquiry cleared them.
The Football Association said in a statement: "The Fifa Ethics Committee made specific requests and responding to these requests involved searching in excess of 500,000 documents.
"The search parameters were established with Mr Garcia's office. The documents searched included intelligence gathered by the bid team. All documents within the search parameters were disclosed.
"In addition Andy Anson has confirmed that any intelligence that he believed could be substantiated was shared with Mr Garcia in his interview and that everything else was hearsay, gossip and rumour."
Culture Media and Sport select committee chairman John Whittingdale MP has told BBC Sport that, in light of the Sunday Times submission, he would like to hear from FA executives to ascertain if the 'database' exists and, if so, for them to outline its contents.

[BBC]

World Cup Bribery Allegations Continue With Explosive Sunday Times Dossier
The Huffington Post UK
Posted: 30/11/2014 19:47 GMT Updated: 01/12/2014 15:59 GMT
Share
8
Tweet
9
Email
1
Comment
6
Share on Google+

Further allegations of corruption have been made surrounding the 2018 and 2022 World Cup bids.

A "secret database" held within the England 2018 bid alleges that Russia and Qatar swapped votes as part of a huge bilateral gas deal.

The revelations were made in a dossier compiled by the Sunday Times which has been presented to the Commons culture, media and sport committee which subsequently published the findings.

As part of England’s submission to the 2018 World Cup bid, which was won by Russia, ex-MI6 employees and British embassies were hired to spy on their rivals, finding the rules for bidding nations were exploited.

The allegations remain unconfirmed but potentially go as high as Vladimir Putin who is said to have recruited Fifa president Sepp Blatter to help lobby for votes.

Other claims suggest Uefa president and voter, Michel Platini, was given an original Picasso painting by the Russians while Qatar secured the 2022 bid through its dominance in the natural gas industry.

The two countries have always denied any wrongdoing and an internal Fifa investigation cleared backed them in a report that was widely condemned.

However, hours after it was released, US lawyer Michael Garcia, who led the investigation which led to the report, has said the summary "contains numerous materially incomplete and erroneous representations of the facts and conclusions."

Garcia said he would contact Fifa's appeals committee about the summary, which Fifa had insisted on publishing rather than releasing his full original research.

Qatar's shock win to host the 2022 tournament led to widespread claims that Qatari Mohamed Bin Hammam, a former Fifa executive committee member, paid Fifa officials £3 million in bribes to secure backing in the vote.

England's bid also comes under fire in the Sunday Times dossier with its bid team accused of arranging a vote-swapping with agreement with South Korea.

John Whittingdale, chairman of the culture, media and sport committee, said: "I’m very concerned about these allegations both about the existence of this report, which was never made available to us, and also the that the bid team may have broken the rules by making a collusion deal, and I will be seeking a response from the bid team on all these points."

[Huffington]
