Star Wars: The Force Awakens trailer set to become most popular ever
Promo for Star Wars 7 already clocked up over 50m views, with multiple spoof and fan versions hitting internet
Star Wars: The Force Awakens trailer – fan art strikes back
Jurassic World trailer: mess with dinosaur DNA at your peril
Star Wars: The Force Awakens teaser trailer
 Star Wars: The Force Awakens teaser trailer Photograph: PR
Ben Child
Tuesday 2 December 2014 08.27 GMT
Share on Facebook
Share on Twitter
Share via Email
Share on LinkedIn
Share on Google+
Shares
219
Comments
17
The debut teaser for Star Wars: The Force Awakens is on course to become the most-viewed movie trailer of all time, according to the Hollywood Reporter. The trade magazine cites a spokesperson for technology firm Zefr.

The 88-second promo for JJ Abrams’s film has so far been viewed 52.8m times on YouTube after hitting the web on 28 November, giving it the most opening-week plays of the year ahead of the teaser for The Avengers: Age of Ultron. The latter trailer was viewed 50.6m times in a week after leaking into the web in October.

0:00
/
0:00
Facebook
Twitter
Pinterest
expand
 Star Wars: The Force Awakens: watch the trailer - video
Also proving popular is the debut teaser for Jurassic Park sequel Jurassic World, which has been viewed 53.9m times on YouTube since appearing online on 25 November.

The trailer for The Force Awakens has become a cultural phenomenon in its own right, with a Lego version, a satirical “George Lucas cut” (featuring incongruous CGI aliens) and a Spaceballs version (splicing in footage from Mel Brooks’ famous 1987 spoof) all hitting the web. 


Star Wars: The Force Awakens will see Mark Hamill, Carrie Fisher and Harrison Ford returning to the classic roles of Luke Skywalker, Princess Leia and Han Solo from the original Star Wars trilogy, with Oscar Isaac, Adam Driver, Max von Sydow, John Boyega and Andy Serkis also joining the cast along with British newcomers Daisy Ridley and Pip Andersen. Abrams’s film is due for release in December 2015.

[[The Guardian]]


Star Wars trailer gets 40 million views in 3 days
By Frank Pallotta   @frankpallotta December 1, 2014: 11:31 AM ET


The money behind 'Star Wars'
153
TOTAL SHARES
92
59
2
NEW YORK (CNNMoney)
The newest "Star Wars" is already turning out to be a force to reckon with.
That's if you take into account the buzz surrounding just the teaser for Disney's (DIS) "Star Wars: The Force Awakens." The trailer has picked up over 40 million YouTube views in less than three days since its release Friday.
If its current trajectory holds, the trailer could create a new viewing record at some time on its fourth day on Tuesday.
The current record is held by the trailer for "Avengers: Age of Ultron," which clocked in 50.6 million views in the best first week debut of 2014.
Related: Lucasfilm disputes brewery's 'Star Wars' beer name
The latest Star Wars trailer has also been hugely popular on social media with over 165,000 likes and nearly 140,000 shares on Facebook.
iTunes Trailers was the first to release the trailer, but people had trouble loading it on the site.
However, fans were delighted to see that the trailer soon showed up on YouTube via MovieClips and eventually the official Star Wars YouTube page.
The 88-second long teaser has a lot of treats for "Star Wars" fans, replete with droids, lightsabers, a rousing John Williams score, and the iconic Millennium Falcon flying once again.
Some Internet users were critical that newcomer John Boyega -- a person of color -- was donning a Stormtrooper suit, worn by soldiers of the evil Empire.
Boyega responded to the criticisms on his Instagram by simply saying, "To whom it may concern... get used to it."
Others had fun creating parodies like a shot for shot remake using Lego's.
Disney's "Star Wars: The Force Awakens" hits theaters next December. 

[[CNN]]


'Star Wars: The Force Awakens' teaser trailer is setting Internet records
Passing 'Jurassic World' and 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' for the top YouTube trailer of 2014, the 88-second clip is on track to be the most-viewed trailer of all time.
BY ETHAN SACKS    NEW YORK DAILY NEWS Tuesday, December 2, 2014, 1:34 PM A A A
183
26
3
SHARE THIS URL

‘Star Wars: The Force Awakens’ is on track to be the most-watched Internet trailer in history.‘Star Wars: The Force Awakens’ is on track to be the most-watched Internet trailer in history.PreviousNext‘Star Wars: The Force Awakens’ is on track to be the most-watched Internet trailer in history.  The teaser trailer, starring John Boyega, is already the most watched of 2014, passing both ‘Jurassic World’ and ‘Avengers: Age of Ultron.’ Enlarge
DISNEY
Hokey religions and ancient weapons are no match for a good teaser trailer at your side.

The 88-second first look at “Star Wars: The Force Awakens” notched the best first week of any YouTube trailer on the Internet with more than 60 million views, reported the video metrics group Zefr.

Those numbers have director J.J. Abrams’ “Episode VII” making the Kessel Run past runner-ups “Jurassic World” (53.9 million) and “Avengers: Age of Ultron” (50.6 million).


'Star Wars: The Force Awakens' HD trailer
NY Daily News

But with all due respect to Hulks and hulking dinosaurs, no movie on the 2015 slate than “The Force Awakens,” which many industry insiders are expecting to rival "Avatar" for the highest grossing film of all time.

The “Star Wars” teaser trailer is on pace to become the most-watched Internet trailer of all time, according to The Hollywood Reporter.

Hammered! ‘Marvel's Avengers: Age Of Ultron’ has fallen to the third-most-watched trailer of the year.
JAY MAIDMENT/MARVEL
Hammered! ‘Marvel's Avengers: Age Of Ultron’ has fallen to the third-most-watched trailer of the year.
The first part of a new trilogy and the first new addition to the franchise since Disney bought Lucasfilm for $4 billion in 2012 will land in theaters on Dec. 18, 2012.

[[NY DAILY]]


New Star Wars Trailer Divides Fans Over How Pathetic They Really Are
Posted: 12/01/2014 5:21 pm EST Updated: 12/01/2014 5:59 pm EST
On Friday, the 88-second trailer for the upcoming Star Wars: The Force Awakens debuted online and in theaters, immediately dividing fans over how pathetic their lives really are. "I drove two hours to the Regal Warrington Crossing Stadium 22 & IMAX and got a ticket for Horrible Bosses 2 just to see it," said Irving Forblooth of Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. "After I wrote a twelve-page reaction on my 'Oy, With the Lens Flare' blog, I realized what a deeply profound loser I am. And I am. Oh, yes, by the Dark Lords of the Sith, I am!"

Many fans of the Star Wars franchise disagree about being pitiful caricatures, just because they are fastidiously dissecting the trailer of a film that won't be opening in theaters for more than a year. "There's no shame in my passion for Star Wars," says Neil LeBargues, who teaches a yearly Comic-Con seminar "Fan Fiction: How Faulkner Would Have Written Leia Blowing Han." LeBargues adds: "If writing a doctoral thesis on methodology and epistemology of economics in the Trade Federation and Neimoidian labor disputes makes me pathetic, then call me pathetic."

Others, like Mina Talwool, are more unsure. "I saw the first one when I was twelve. I should be over it by now. I really should. Help me, Obi-Wan Kenobi! You're my only hope!"

[[HUFFINGTON]]


Coming to a Theater Far, Far Into the Future
Trailer for ‘Star Wars: The Force Awakens’ Goes Online
By DAVE ITZKOFFNOV. 28, 2014
Photo

The less-than-90-second trailer from "Star Wars: The Force Awakens" offers a tiny glimpse at a movie to come in December 2015. Credit Lucasfilm Ltd
Continue reading the main storyShare This Page
Share
Tweet
Pin
Email
Save
MORE
This will be a day long remembered by fans of science-fiction fantasies, aficionados of mega-budget movie franchises and viewers who regard the “Star Wars” series with a reverence bordering on the religious.

On Friday morning, Lucasfilm released a teaser trailer online for “Star Wars: The Force Awakens,” the first new live-action “Star Wars” film in nearly a decade, which will open theatrically in December 2015.

Though less than 90 seconds long and offering only the barest glimpses of a motion picture that audiences cannot see for more than a year, the “Star Wars” trailer set off an instantaneous wave of online analysis and armchair commentary: a cycle of approval, criticism, and criticism of that criticism after the trailer’s release.

The trailer, which is also being shown in about 30 North American movie theaters over the weekend, represents the first new piece of flesh-and-blood “Star Wars” material since this influential space adventure saga appeared to come to an end in 2005, with “Star Wars: Episode III — Revenge of the Sith.” (Despite the Roman numerals, this was actually the sixth film in a sequence that began with the release of George Lucas’s original 1977 blockbuster, “Star Wars.”)

The seemingly dormant franchise was resuscitated when the Walt Disney Company purchased Lucasfilm in 2012 and started work on a new series of “Star Wars” films. The first of these, “The Force Awakens,” is directed by J. J. Abrams, and its cast mixes actors made famous by the original “Star Wars” trilogy (including Mark Hamill, Carrie Fisher and Harrison Ford) with younger newcomers (like Oscar Isaac, John Boyega and Daisy Ridley).

Not long after the trailer appeared online around 10 a.m., comment pages and Twitter feeds were filled with diametrically opposed assessments. One YouTube pundit happily wrote that he was “geeking out over here” and experiencing a “code red nerdgasm,” while another complained that the movie’s actors looked “like cheap actors they found in the gutter,” rather than those you expect in “a full-blown expensive film.”

Devin Faraci, a Los Angeles-based writer and editor of the film site badassdigest.com, said in a telephone interview that he was glad the online release of the trailer meant that he did not have to watch it at a 7 a.m. showing of the Disney animated feature “Big Hero 6.” Releasing the trailer in only 30 theaters was an apparent calculation to arouse interest.

Over all, Mr. Faraci said he was glad that the trailer emphasized newer players like Mr. Boyega, a rare black actor in the “Star Wars” series.

“It would have been so easy to make a trailer that was nothing but nostalgic callbacks,” Mr. Faraci said. “But it does capture the feeling of what a ‘Star Wars’ movie is.”

Linda Holmes, a culture writer for NPR, said she also enjoyed the trailer, but expressed dismay at the volume of vehemently negative comments she had seen — remarks directed at the trailer as well as at other commenters.

As often happens in the lengthy buildup to a work of mass entertainment, Ms. Holmes said in a telephone interview: “It’s all about being mad all the time. No matter whether people wind up liking it or not liking it, the conversation becomes negative.”

“There are times when enthusiasm can only be expressed through dissatisfaction with the product that you get,” she said. “Or if you like the product you get, it becomes all about expressing your dissatisfaction with other people’s failure to appreciate it.”

With the “Star Wars” franchise, Ms. Holmes said, some moviegoers already feel burned by the so-called “prequel trilogy,” three follow-up films released between 1999 and 2005, “that people really substantively didn’t like.” Some of the knee-jerk negativity directed at “The Force Awakens,” she said, “is baked-in skepticism from actual experience.”

Whether viewers were commenting on the retrograde aesthetic of the new “Star Wars” trailer or the handle on a new lightsaber weapon, Ms. Holmes said they were really trying to stake out pre-emptive opinions that would still seem insightful many months from now.

Mr. Faraci said that this kind of bickering was a longstanding tradition with “Star Wars” fans: those who regard the original trilogy of films as canonical, those who worship at the altar of the prequels, and those who embrace various films across the franchise.

“People have their own particular versions of ‘Star Wars,’ and you’re a heretic if you have a different approach to it,” he said.

The release of another round of films, he said, “will just create another schism of the faithful.”

He added, “This will be the new reformed church of Star Wars.”

[[NY TIMES]]
