Sweden confirms foreign sub in its waters
By Mariano Castillo and Lindsay Isaac, CNN
updated 4:37 PM EST, Fri November 14, 2014

Your video will begin momentarily.
STORY HIGHLIGHTS
Sweden confirms that a foreign submarine from an unknown county was in its waters
Sweden considers it a grave violation
The military had been investigating for more than three weeks
(CNN) -- A foreign submarine recently trespassed in Swedish territory, officials there said Friday, but they couldn't say what country the vessel belonged to.
The Swedish military began an intense sweep of the waters off the coast of Stockholm more than three weeks ago.
On Friday, the Swedish Armed Forces announced that its investigation confirmed that a submarine was indeed in Swedish waters.
 Sweden hunts for mystery sub Sweden hunts for mystery sub
When the search started, the Swedish newspaper Svenska Dagbladet reported that the military became suspicious after Swedish intelligence picked up an emergency radio call in Russian. Russia denied that it had any vessel in Swedish waters.
Russia flexes muscles with long-range bomber flights near U.S. shores
While confirming that there was a territorial violation, the military said that "the analysis cannot determine the nationality of the intruder."
Swedish Prime Minister Stefan Lofven gave a warning to whoever the intruder may have been.
"The government considers this to be extraordinary serious," he said in a news conference. "Those who consider to enter Swedish territory shall understand what huge risks it will mean in the future."
He vowed to strengthen Sweden's ability to identify illegal activities in its waters.
Opinion: Russia taking jabs at Sweden
Sweden used naval, ground and air military assets to investigate the report of the submarine, the armed forces said. One military observation determined, with "no doubt" that the foreign vessel was a submarine.
In a statement, the military declined to elaborate on its finding, saying it did not want to disclose details about its capabilities.
But the armed forces did say that observations from the public helped in their investigation.

[CNN]

Sweden calls off hunt for submarine
Reports of foreign underwater activity in the Stockholm archipelago triggered week-long search
Share 197


inShare
10
Email
David Crouch in Gothenburg
The Guardian, Friday 24 October 2014 10.39 BST
Jump to comments (…)
HMS Visby
The Swedish corvette HMS Visby during the search on Mysingen Bay. Photograph: Fredrik Sandberg/AP
Sweden’s navy has cancelled its week-long operation in the archipelago off Stockholm after finding no trace of the Russian submarine widely anticipated by military specialists and the media.

“Our assessment is that in the inner archipelago there was a plausible foreign underwater operation,” Rear Adm Anders Grenstad said. “But we believe that what has violated Swedish waters has left.”

Whatever was there could not have been a conventional submarine, Grenstad said, but a “craft of a lesser type”. It was not possible to state how big it was or to what country it belonged, he added. “The operation is substantially complete. The vessels and amphibious units have gone to port and resumed normal preparedness,” he said.

The hunt began last Friday after a member of the public contacted the armed forces with substantial and credible information, he said. The public reported 250 sightings during the ensuing week, with the navy taking five of them seriously.

Some reports given prominence in the media turned out to have innocent explanations, such as the “man in black” allegedly hunted by special intelligence who was revealed to be a pensioner fishing for sea trout. There was also a media focus on possible Russian “mother ships” in the Baltic that were linked to the Russian president, Vladimir Putin.

For seven days, Sweden’s navy criss-crossed a vast expanse of water dotted with 30,000 islands, in what specialists likened to a search for a needle in a haystack.

Critics complained of a media circus surrounding the hunt, as several newspapers hired helicopters to follow the navy, whose specialist submarine-hunting helicopters were sold off in 2008. “In comparison with the newspapers’ reporting, Star Wars seems to be a social-realist documentary,” columnist Peter Kadhammar wrote in Aftonbladet, a popular tabloid.

Russia’s defence ministry consistently denied that one of its vessels was in Swedish waters, and dismissed the operation as a “tragicomedy”.

The fevered atmosphere of the past week recalled the cold war fears that gripped the country after a Russian nuclear-armed submarine became grounded on rocks in southern Sweden in 1981. For more than a decade, the navy conducted frequent searches of Swedish waters, sometimes dropping depth charges on suspect objects. But no Russian submarine was identified.

This week’s naval operation cost about SEK20m (£1.7m), or about the same sum that was spent on fighting forest fires in Sweden over the summer, Grenstad said.

Sweden elected a minority “red-green” government in September, which has faced pressure on defence spending after Russian incursions into the country’s airspace and heightened fears about Sweden’s defence capabilities in the worst crisis in east-west relations for a generation.

Before the submarine hunt, the government had agreed to implement the recommendations of a cross-party parliamentary committee to increase defence spending and proceed with the SEK900m purchase of 10 fighter aircraft and a submarine.

Announcing its first budget on Thursday, the government confirmed the additional SEK300m each year for the next five years, but the centre-right opposition claimed it amounted to a cut in real terms.

A conspiracy theory that the submarine scare was manufactured to strengthen the navy’s case for greater finance was widely discussed on social media. “The timing is almost too good to be true,” according to Aftonbladet.

Maj Gen Igor Konashenkov, official spokesperson for Russia’s ministry of defence, told Russian reporters on Friday that Sweden’s submarine hunt threatened the future free movement of shipping in the Baltic.

“Such uncorroborated actions by the Swedish armed forces, inflamed by rhetoric in the spirit of the cold war, lead only to an escalation of tension in the region. Their consequence is likely to be not a strengthening of security in the country, but an undermining of the basis of maritime economic activity in the waters of the Baltic sea.”

He said Sweden had adopted Napoleon’s principle to “get stuck in and then we’ll see” without thinking about where it would end, opting to drag out the “fiasco” for as long as possible.

[The Guardian]

Sweden submarine search called off
Swedish corvette HMS Stockholm patrols Jungfrufjarden in the Stockholm archipelago, Sweden, 20 October 2014
Swedish ships and planes have been searching waters off Stockholm for the past week
Continue reading the main story
Related Stories

What was lurking in Sweden's waters?
Sweden could use force in sub hunt
Sweden sub hunt - in 60 seconds Watch
The Swedish military has called off its week-long search for a suspected submarine in the sea south of Stockholm, officials say.

Naval vessels and planes have been searching the Stockholm archipelago for the last week, amid suspicions a Russian submarine was in trouble there.

Russia's defence ministry denied any of its ships were involved.

The vessel, whatever it was, is now believed to have left Sweden's territorial waters.

The Swedish operation was reported to have been the country's biggest military mobilisation since the Cold War.

In a statement, the military said (in Swedish): "This means the bulk of ships and amphibious forces have returned to port." It added that some smaller units would remain in the area.

Rear Admiral Anders Grenstad told reporters: "We assess that the [vessel] that violated our waters has now left."

"It's the assessment of the defence forces that probably foreign underwater activity has taken place in Stockholm's inner archipelago," he said, calling any such activity within Swedish territory "unacceptable".

The military believed at least one vessel was involved, he said, adding that it was probably not a large submarine, but "a small vessel".

Hundreds of people were said to be involved in the search, that the military said was based on "several credible operations".

Swedish officials had not said which country they thought was behind the "underwater activities", but there were widespread suspicions that the Russian navy was involved.

Swedish Navy fast-attack vessels engaged in a military operation in the Stockholm Archipelago, Sweden, 19 October 2014
The operation was said to be Sweden's largest mobilisation since the Cold War
Russian officials have repeatedly denied any involvement, with a defence ministry statement saying: "There have been no extraordinary, let alone emergency situations, involving Russian military vessels."

Whatever the answers, what is clear is that Sweden's underwater defences are not up to scratch, the BBC's Malcolm Brabant reports.

A new submarine hunting helicopter is not due to come into service for a number of years, our correspondent adds.

Soviet submarine sightings caused Cold War security alerts in Sweden in the 1980s.

Russia's military intervention in Ukraine this year has fuelled suspicion about its intentions towards other neighbouring states, notably in the Baltic.

On Tuesday, Nato said its jets intercepted a Russian spy plane that had briefly entered Estonian airspace.

Russia said the plane had been on a training flight and had not violated Estonian airspace.

Sweden is not part of Nato but has tightened its ties with the alliance.

It signed a pact with Nato on 5 September, allowing it to engage in joint training exercises, and receive assistance from Nato troops in emergencies.

[BBC]

Sweden Ends Submarine Search, Closing Book on Intrigue-Tinged Episode
By DAN BILEFSKYOCT. 24, 2014
Continue reading the main storyShare This Page
Share
Tweet
Email
Save
MORE
“The Hunt for Reds in October” — as the search for a mysterious submarine in Swedish waters has been termed — is over, at least for now.

The Swedish authorities said Friday that a military team that had included minesweepers, helicopters and ships had been called off after a weeklong search for a vessel that never materialized.

“The hunt is over, and now the time has come to analyze what happened,” said Ingela Nilsson, a spokeswoman for the Swedish Defense Ministry. “Everyone in Sweden has been talking about the hunt, and people were proud to see our military can conduct a large operation like this.”

At a time of rising East-West tensions, fanned by Russia’s involvement in the Ukraine crisis, the search was the biggest mobilization of its kind in Sweden since the end of the Cold War. Some ground forces will remain on alert, Ms. Nilsson said.

Continue reading the main story
RELATED COVERAGE

A Swedish minesweeper on Sunday in the Stockholm archipelago. Reports about an unidentified vessel have spawned conspiracy theories.Submarine Search Near Stockholm Reminiscent of a Cold War ThrillerOCT. 21, 2014
Swedish Navy vessels have been searching for a foreign ship in the waters off Stockholm.Sweden Hunts for Source of Underwater SignalsOCT. 19, 2014
Signs of a possible vessel in the Stockholm archipelago were first detected on Oct. 17, and Swedish officials said they suspected that a foreign submarine had infiltrated Swedish waters. Officials were at pains not to name the origin of the vessel, even as suspicion immediately fell on Russia.

The Russian government has emphatically denied having a vessel in the area. Nevertheless, Ms. Nilsson said that recent assertiveness by Russia in the region had heightened Swedish vigilance. She said the sight of the large-scale mobilization had helped reinforce public confidence in the Swedish military, and in government plans to increase military spending in response to rising tensions fueled by Russian actions in Ukraine and beyond.

The search for the submarine captured the global imagination and spurred enough conspiracy theories to fill a Cold War thriller.

Some suspected that the Russians were testing a new minisubmarine. Rumors of an espionage plot also surfaced after a mysterious man in black was spotted wading near an unidentified craft. In Sweden, a neutral country that is a member of the European Union but is not in NATO, the hunt for the vessel brought back still-vivid memories of the Cold War intrigue of past decades.

In 1981, a Soviet submarine suspected of carrying nuclear weapons hit an underwater rock off Karlskrona, Sweden, leading to a standoff that lasted more than a week. While the Soviet captain was being questioned aboard a Swedish torpedo boat in the company of two Soviet diplomats, the submarine was pulled off the rock by the Swedes.

While Sweden has been gripped with a Cold War fever of sorts, spurred by talk of the vessel, Ms. Nilsson emphasized that the country remained confident in its security. “I wouldn’t say people are disappointed the search is over,” she said. “The armed forces have done what they could and took it seriously. People are not afraid.”

[NY Times]

Sweden says has proof of foreign submarine intrusion in October
STOCKHOLM Fri Nov 14, 2014 8:04am EST

inShare
4
Share this

Email
Print

A photo shows an object travelling southwards at a speed of one knot inside Swedish waters October 15, 2014.  REUTERS-Claudio Bresciani-TT News Agency
1 OF 4. A photo shows an object travelling southwards at a speed of one knot inside Swedish waters October 15, 2014.
CREDIT: REUTERS/CLAUDIO BRESCIANI/TT NEWS AGENCY
RELATED NEWS
Sweden's Saab has submitted bid to upgrade Australia's submarine fleet: Swedish media
Volvo to cut up to 3,000 staff - paper
ANALYSIS & OPINION
Franco-German meeting
RELATED TOPICS
World »
(Reuters) - Sweden has proof that a small foreign submarine was operating illegally in its waters last month, its top military officer said on Friday after a mysterious episode that triggered the country's biggest military mobilization since the Cold War.

More than 200 troops, stealth ships and helicopters scoured Baltic waters off the capital Stockholm in October after reports of foreign "underwater activity", but without finding or bringing to the surface any submarine.

"The military can confirm that a small U-boat breached Sweden's territorial waters. We can exclude all alternative explanations," the head of Sweden's armed forces, General Sverker Goransson, told a news conference.

He said Sweden had not been able to identify which country was behind the intrusion.

The submarine's presence was picked up by military sensors, Goransson said. Supporting evidence, he said, included a picture showing a bubble pattern typical of a diving submarine and a sonar image of tracks on the sea floor.

Prime Minister Stefan Lofven said intrusion into Swedish territorial water was unacceptable and that Sweden would bolster its capabilities in detecting and identifying such activity.

"We will defend Sweden's territorial integrity with all available means," Lofven said.

The submarine hunt reflected tensions in a region where governments are increasingly worried about Russian assertiveness because of Moscow's role in the Ukraine crisis.

Sweden has already said it will increase spending on its military, including up to 70 new fighter jets and new submarines, as it looks to reverse decades of underspending on its armed forces.

The Nordic country has also drawn closer to NATO in the past few years although the current government has ruled out seeking membership of the U.S.-led alliance.

[Reuters]
