Emergency repair' reported at Ukraine nuclear power plant
By Elena Sandyrev and Jason Hanna, CNN
updated 2:07 PM EST, Wed December 3, 2014
The country's energy minister said Wednesday that no one is in danger of radiation from the plant in southeastern Ukraine.
The country's energy minister said Wednesday that no one is in danger of radiation from the plant in southeastern Ukraine.
STORY HIGHLIGHTS
A short-circuit impaired part of the power plant in southeastern Ukraine, an official says
There's no radiation threat, Ukraine's energy minister says
Minister: "This is a technical problem that is currently being solved"
Emergency repairs should be finished by Friday, the country's Energy Ministry says
(CNN) -- A short-circuit has impaired part of a nuclear power plant in southeastern Ukraine, causing power shortages in parts of the country but putting no one in danger of radiation, the country's newly appointed energy minister said Wednesday.
The incident at the plant in Zaporizhya happened last week, and emergency repairs should be finished by Friday, the Energy Ministry said.
"There is no threat to the reactor," Energy Minister Volodymyr Demchyshyn said. "This is a technical problem that is currently being solved."
The short-circuit happened in a power output system, he said. Information on what caused the problem in the plant's third block wasn't immediately available. Low temperatures had recently caused an increase in demand for power, the ministry said in a written statement earlier this week.
 Ukraine crisis economic impacts Ukraine civilians caught in crossfire
"The imbalance of the power supply is due to the emergency repair of the energy unit #3 in Zaporizhya nuclear power plant, as well as inadequate supplies of coal in the power plants' warehouses," the Energy Ministry said in a statement Tuesday.
"The situation is under control, and the unit will be under repair until December 5th."
A ministry spokeswoman told CNN that the incident happened Friday but was announced only on Tuesday because people started asking about the power shortages.
The media office of EnergoAtom, the state nuclear power plant operator, said the internal generator safety system cut off the transformer for the plant's third unit.
Zaporizhya is Europe's largest nuclear power plant, according to EnergoAtom. It has been operating since 1984, with the third unit brought online in 1986. It has six power units altogether, with a total capacity of 6,000 megawatts.
Zaporizhya is in territory controlled by the Ukrainian government in Kiev. It is about 200 kilometers (125 miles) west of the city of Donetsk, which is a stronghold of pro-Russian rebels that have been battling Ukrainian forces for months in southeastern Ukraine.
The plant is about 520 kilometers (325 miles) southeast of Chernobyl, the Ukrainian community where a nuclear power plant reactor exploded when Ukraine was part of the Soviet Union in 1986. It is estimated that more than 4,000 cleanup workers died and close to 70,000 were disabled from radiation-related causes.
According to the United Nations, the explosion and fire that occurred at Chernobyl affected, directly or indirectly, 9 million people because of radioactive materials released into the atmosphere.

[CNN]

Short Circuit at Ukraine Nuclear Plant Cuts Power
COUNTRY IS QUICK TO EMPHASIZE THAT THERE'S NO DANGER

By Jenn Gidman,  Newser Staff
Posted Dec 3, 2014 8:56 AM CST
STORY   COMMENTS (2)
             
Embed this story
(NEWSER) – A short circuit at a nuclear plant in Ukraine zapped electricity production, but the country was quick to emphasize that the glitch posed no danger, the AP reports. New energy minister Volodymyr Demchyshyn insisted today, per Reuters, that he's doing what he can to speed things up so Ukrainians without electricity will get power back soon. "The situation is under control, and the unit will be under repair until December 5th," said a ministry statement issued yesterday, as per CNN.

The initial report about what happened at the Zaporizhia plant came out on Monday, but it didn't gain steam until PM Arseniy Yatsenyuk addressed it at today's meeting, the AP notes. Demchyshyn assures the public that the problem originated in the electricity transmission system (not the reactor itself) and that there are other reasons that also contributed to the "imbalance of the power supply," including not enough coal in power plants' warehouses and low temperatures, CNN notes. (As that's happening, Ukraine and pro-Russian rebels have a new ceasefire.)

[Newser]

Ukraine reports accident at Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant
03/12 13:50 CET



McCain’s ‘neofascist’ comments strain US-Hungary relations
04/12 22:31

Italy police release video showing arrest of alleged ‘Mafia Capitale’ boss
04/12 22:20

Britain and US pledge to help Afghanistan after combat troops leave
04/12 20:42

Ukraine president announces new ceasefire
04/12 18:45

Afghan new president faces major test of skills, NATO leaving, stronger Taliban
04/12 18:19

Human Rights Watch accuses Russia of ‘worst crackdown since Soviet era’
04/12 18:12

Rebel raid on Chechen capital Grozny leaves 20 people dead
04/12 17:54

Lift-off letdown as NASA Orion capsule launch is postponed
04/12 17:04

Israel oil spill ‘worst in country’s history’
04/12 17:04

Al Qaeda militants in Yemen threaten to kill US hostage Luke Somers
04/12 16:49

Kerry tells Russia the US is not seeking confrontation over Ukraine
04/12 16:24

Putin defies West over Ukraine and ‘sacred Crimea’
04/12 16:09

‘I can’t breathe’: US protests spread over ‘chokehold’ death of Eric Garner
04/12 15:51

False gunman alarm spreads panic at Zurich University
04/12 15:33

Former East German state Thuringia first to get post-unification leftist leader
04/12 15:20

Driving licences suspended for French anti-radar activists who used Facebook to warn motorists of police activity
04/12 15:20

Next James Bond film ‘Spectre’ vows loyalty to past 007 icons
04/12 13:59

Putin attacks West and claims Russia can withstand any challenge in State of Nation speech
04/12 13:59

Half of all Lufthansa long-haul flights cancelled in second strike this week
04/12 13:28

Chechen rebels stage deadly attack on Grozny ahead of big Putin speech
04/12 13:09
PreviousNextclose carousel
smaller_textlarger_text"There is no problem with the reactor"
Ukraine has reported an accident at a nuclear power plant but the government says it poses no danger.

It happened on November 28, forcing one reactor to be shut down.

The Zaporizhzhya plant in the country’s southeast produces 
a fifth of Ukraine’s electricity.

It lies some 300 kilometres west of Donetsk, well away from the conflict zone where the Ukrainian army is fighting pro-Russian separatists.

Since the Chernobyl disaster in 1986, under an international convention countries are supposed to report any nuclear accident to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in Vienna. It said it had no immediate comment.

Ukrainian Energy Minister Volodymyr Demchyshyn insisted there was no threat.

“Today and tomorrow, tests are being carried out and from Friday, the plant will be back working normally. There is no problem with the reactor, there’s no link at all to the reactor. None whatsoever… forget it,” he told a news conference.

His statement said the problem was caused by an electrical short circuit, which caused “technical damage” but did not threaten the reactor.

Some disruption to electricity supplies has been reported.

News of the accident was revealed by the Prime Minister Andriy Yatsenyuk as his new cabinet met.

The nuclear industry provides about half of Ukraine’s electricity.

It is expected to be in greater demand this winter due to fuel shortages resulting from the suspension of Russian gas supplies.

[Euro News]


MILITARY & DEFENSE More: Reuters Reuters World
Ukraine Prime Minister: There Has Been An Accident At A Nuclear Plant In The Southeast
MICHAEL B KELLEY AND REUTERS
DEC. 3, 2014, 5:56 AM	29,530 19
FACEBOOK
LINKEDIN
TWITTER
GOOGLE+
PRINT
EMAIL
Screenshot 2014 12 03 06.04.09
Wikipedia
The Zaporizhye nuclear power plant is the largest in Europe.

Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseny Yatseniuk said Wednesday that there had been an accident at a nuclear plant in southeastern Ukraine, Reuters reports.

"I know that an accident has occurred at the Zaporizhye NPP," Yatseniuk said, asking new energy minister Volodymyr Demchyshyn to make clear when the problem would be resolved and what steps would be taken to restore normal power supply across Ukraine.

The news agency Interfax Ukraine said the problem had occurred at bloc No 3 — a 1,000-megawatt reactor — and the resulting lack of output had worsened the power crisis in the country. Interfax added that the bloc was expected to come back on stream on Friday.

There are reports that the damage is minor, with no damage to the reactor. Ukraine gets about half its power from nuclear plants.


"Assuming it is indeed as minor as now appears, suggest Yatsenyuk goes on a 'how to talk about nuclear incidents without sowing panic' course," Guardian journalist Shaun Walker, who has covered the conflict in Ukraine, tweeted.

1024px Kernkraftwerk_Saporischschja.JPG
Wikipedia
The six units of the Zaporizhia NPP.

Ukraine voted on a new government on Tuesday night.

Under President Petro Poroshenko and Yatseniuk, Kiev has cut aid to the eastern regions held by pro-Russian rebels since soon after protesters toppled Kiev's pro-Moscow president in February.

Fighting has continued despite a cease-fire reached Sept. 5. In the rebel stronghold of Donetsk a senior separatist figure said rival sides agreed a new local truce from 10 a.m. ET around the city airport.

"But this is 65th time we agree about this. I don't rule out that there is going to be 66th time," Andrei Purgin said. Sounds of fighting abated but did not stop. Kiev said rebels renewed attacks on the airport in the evening.

Russia acknowledges supporting the separatists but denies Western charges of being a party to the armed conflict.



Read more: http://www.businessinsider.com/accident-ukraine-nuclear-plant#ixzz3KyfC6OMm

[Business Insider]

Ukraine nuclear power plant fault adds to electricity shortages
Country forced to introduce power cuts amid short circuit at Zaporizhya facility and falling coal supplies
Share 54


inShare
1
Email
Agence France-Presse in Kiev
The Guardian, Wednesday 3 December 2014 14.36 GMT
Workers at a Ukrainian coal mine 
Workers leave the pit after a day in a coal mine in Ukraine, now hit by power shortages. Photograph: Uriel Sinai/Getty Images
A short circuit at a nuclear plant in Ukraine posed no threat but had added to electricity shortages at a time when the country is struggling to keep the lights on, an official has said.

The electrical fault at the Zaporizhya plant in the south-east of the country last Friday is due to be fixed in the coming days but comes as coal shortages are forcing partial blackouts across Ukraine.

“The accident happened in the third block of the Zaporizhya nuclear power plant in the power output section. This is in no way associated with the reactor,” energy minister Volodymyr Demchyshyn said on Wednesday.

The plant was forced to shut down the affected generator, causing electricity shortages in the surrounding region.

Demchyshyn said tests would be run at the block over the next two days and “by Friday it will be working at full strength”.

The government introduced rolling power cuts on Tuesday in response to the fault as well as rapidly diminishing coal stocks.

Ukraine gets just under half its electricity from nuclear stations and the rest from coal-fired power plants. The conflict in the east has cut the government off from swaths of the coal-rich Donbass mining region.

In late November, Russia announced without warning that it was stopping coal supplies to Ukraine, claiming force majeure but offering no explanation. Experts say Ukraine is short of 3m tonnes of coal for the winter season.

A statement on the Zaporizhya plant’s website said production unit three had been disconnected from the power network until 5 December and that radiation levels around the plant were unchanged.

Ukraine was the scene of the worst nuclear accident in history in 1986, when an explosion at the Chernobyl power plant in the north of the country released radiation across much of Europe and the Soviet Union.

[The Guardian]
